]

ANTHOLOGY

&’ ‘4*

TTTTTTTT

ANCIENT

F\’OME

BYBLIOTECH.ORG
#Mmmw

A e e e e
£<<I e,
V)
<
O
P
33 <0
TEXTS FROM ANCIENT ROME

THE COMPLETE

TACITUS

ANTHOLOGY

THE HISTORIES
THE ANNALS
GERMANIA
AGRICOLA
A DIALOGUE ON ORATORY

WWW.BYBLIOTECH.ORG
   The Complete Tacitus Anthology: The Histories, The Annals, Germania,

                          Agricola, A Dialogue on Oratory

 
 

 
                          Copyright: www.Bybliotech.org

 
                            Published: September 2012

 
                          Publisher: www.Bybliotech.org

 
 

 
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in

retrieval system, copied in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical,

photocopying, recording or otherwise transmitted without written permission

    from the publisher. You must not circulate this book in any format.

  

 
 

 
 

 
“It is the rare fortune of these days that one may think what one likes and say

what one thinks.”

 
                                                      -Tacitus, The Histories, Book I

 CONTENTS
 

                              THE HISTORIES

                                          BOOK I

                                        BOOK II

                                        BOOK III

                                        BOOK IV

                                        BOOK V

 

                                THE ANNALS

                                          BOOK I

                                        BOOK II

                                        BOOK III

                                        BOOK IV

                                        BOOK V

                                        BOOK VI

 

                                    GERMANIA

 

                  AGRICOLA AND BRITTANIA

 

      A DIALOGUE CONCERNING ORATORYBYBLIOTECH.ORG
 THE
HISTORIES:
BOOKI

 

 
                                        BOOK I 
                                        Preface

 
[a.d.  69.]  I  propose  to  begin  my  narrative  with  the  second  consulship  of

Servius  Galba,  in  which  Titus  Vinius  was  his  colleague.  Many  historians

have  dealt  with  the  820  years  of  the  earlier  period  beginning  with  the

foundation of Rome, and the story of the Roman Republic has been told with

no less ability than truth. After the Battle of Actium, when the interests of

peace were served by the centralization of all authority in the hands of one

man, there followed a dearth of literary ability, and at the same time truth

suffered more and more, partly from ignorance of politics, which were no

longer a citizen's concern, partly from the growing taste for flattery or from

hatred of the ruling house. So between malice on one side and servility on the

other the interests of posterity were neglected. But historians find that a tone

of flattery soon incurs the stigma of servility and earns for them the contempt

of their readers, whereas people readily open their ears to the criticisms of

envy,  since  malice  makes  a  show  of  independence.  Of  Galba,  Otho,  and

Vitellius, I have known nothing either to my advantage or my hurt. I cannot

deny that I originally owed my position to Vespasian, or that I was advanced

by  Titus  and  still  further  promoted  by  Domitian;  but  professing,  as  I  do,

unbiassed honesty, I must speak of no man either with hatred or affection. I

have reserved for my old age, if life is spared to me, the reigns of the sainted

Nerva and of the Emperor Trajan, which afford a richer and withal a safer

theme: for it is the rare fortune of these days that a man may think what he

likes and say what he thinks.

 
The story I now commence is rich in vicissitudes, grim with warfare, torn by

civil  strife,  a  tale  of  horror  even  during  times  of  peace.  It  tells  of  four

emperors slain by the sword, three several civil wars, an even larger number

of  foreign  wars  and  some  that  were  both  at  once:  successes  in  the  East,

disaster in the West, disturbance in Illyricum, disaffection in the provinces of

Gaul,  the  conquest  of  Britain  and  its  immediate  loss,  the  rising  of  the

Sarmatian  and  Suebic  tribes.  It  tells  how  Dacia  had  the  privilege  of

exchanging  blows  with  Rome,  and  how  a  pretender  claiming  to  be  Nero

almost deluded the Parthians into declaring war. Now too Italy was smitten

with new disasters, or disasters it had not witnessed for a long period of

years. Towns along the rich coast of Campania were submerged or buried.

The city was devastated by fires, ancient temples were destroyed, and theCapitol itself was fired by Roman hands. Sacred rites were grossly profaned,

and there were scandals in high places. The sea swarmed with exiles and the

island cliffs were red with blood. Worse horrors reigned in the city. To be

rich  or  well-born  was  a  crime:  men  were  prosecuted  for  holding  or  for

refusing office: merit of any kind meant certain ruin. Nor were the Informers

more  hated  for  their  crimes  than  for  their  prizes:  some  carried  off  a

priesthood or the consulship as their spoil, others won offices and influence

in the imperial household: the hatred and fear they inspired worked universal

havoc.  Slaves  were  bribed  against  their  masters,  freedmen  against  their

patrons, and, if a man had no enemies, he was ruined by his friends.

 
However, the period was not so utterly barren as to yield no examples of

heroism.  There  were  mothers  who  followed  their  sons,  and  wives  their

husbands into exile: one saw here a kinsman's courage and there a son-in-

law's  devotion:  slaves  obstinately  faithful  even  on  the  rack:  distinguished

men bravely facing the utmost straits and matching in their end the famous

deaths of older times. Besides these manifold disasters to mankind there were

portents in the sky and on the earth, thunderbolts and other premonitions of

good and of evil, some doubtful, some obvious. Indeed never has it been

proved by such terrible disasters to Rome or by such clear evidence that

Providence  is  concerned  not  with  our  peace  of  mind  but  rather  with

vengeance for our sin.

 
 

 
                              The State of the Empire

 
 

 
Before I commence my task, it seems best to go back and consider the state

of affairs in the city, the temper of the armies, the condition of the provinces,

and  to  determine  the  elements  of  strength  and  weakness  in  the  different

quarters of the Roman world. By this means we may see not only the actual

course of events, which is largely governed by chance, but also why and how

they occurred.

 
The death of Nero, after the first outburst of joy with which it was greeted,

soon aroused conflicting feelings not only among the senators, the people,

and the soldiers in the city, but also among the generals and their troopsabroad. It had divulged a secret of state: an emperor could be made elsewhere

than at Rome. Still the senate was satisfied. They had immediately taken

advantage of their liberty and were naturally emboldened against a prince

who was new to the throne and, moreover, absent. The highest class of the

 
knights  seconded  the  senate's  satisfaction.  Respectable  citizens,  who  were

attached  as  clients  or  freedmen  to  the  great  families,  and  had  seen  their

patrons condemned or exiled, now revived their hopes. The lowest classes,

who had grown familiar with the pleasures of the theatre and the circus, the

most degraded of the slaves, and Nero's favourites who had squandered their

property and lived on his discreditable bounty, all showed signs of depression

and an eager greed for news.

 
The troops in the city had long been inured to the allegiance of the Caesars,

and it was more by the pressure of intrigue than of their own inclination that

they came to desert Nero. They soon realized that the donation promised in

Galba's name was not to be paid to them, and that peace would not, like war,

offer opportunity for great services and rich rewards. Since they also saw that

the new emperor's favour had been forestalled by the army which proclaimed

him,  they  were  ripe  for  revolution  and  were  further  instigated  by  their

rascally  Praefect  Nymphidius  Sabinus,  who  was  plotting  to  be  emperor

himself. His design was as a matter of fact detected and quashed, but, though

the ringleader was removed, many of the troops still felt conscious of their

treason and could be heard commenting on Galba's senility and avarice. His

austerity—a quality once admired and set high in soldiers' estimation—only

annoyed troops whose contempt for the old methods of discipline had been

fostered by fourteen years of service under Nero. They had come to love the

emperors' vices as much as they once reverenced their virtues in older days.

Moreover Galba had let fall a remark, which augured well for Rome, though

it spelt danger to himself. 'I do not buy my soldiers,' he said, 'I select them.'

And indeed, as things then stood, his words sounded incongruous.

 
 

 
                                  Galba's Position

 
 

 
Galba was old and ill. Of his two lieutenants Titus Vinius was the vilest ofmen and Cornelius Laco the laziest. Hated as he was for Vinius' crimes and

despised for Laco's inefficiency, between them Galba soon came to ruin. His

march  from  Spain  was  slow  and  stained  with  bloodshed.  He  executed

Cingonius Varro, the consul-elect, and Petronius Turpilianus, an ex-consul,

the  former  as  an  accomplice  of  Nymphidius,  the  latter  as  one  of  Nero's

generals. They were both denied any opportunity of a hearing or defence—

and might as well have been innocent. On his arrival at Rome the butchery of

thousands of unarmed soldiers gave an ill omen to his entry, and alarmed

even the men who did the slaughter. The city was filled with strange troops.

A legion had been brought from Spain, and the regiment of marines enrolled

by  Nero  still  remained.  Moreover  there  were  several  detachments  from

Germany,  Britain,  and  Illyricum,  which  had  been  selected  by  Nero,

dispatched to the Caspian Pass for the projected war against the Albanians,

and subsequently recalled to aid in crushing the revolt of Vindex. These were

all fine fuel for a revolution, and, although their favour centred on nobody in

particular, there they were at the disposal of any one who had enterprise.

 
It happened by chance that the news of the death of Clodius Macer and of

Fonteius  Capito  arrived  in  Rome  simultaneously.  Macer,  who  was

undoubtedly raising a disturbance in Africa, was put to death by the imperial

agent Trebonius Garutianus, acting under Galba's orders:

 
Capito  had  made  a  similar  attempt  in  Germany  and  was  killed  by  two

officers,  Cornelius  Aquinus  and  Fabius  Valens,  without  waiting  for

instructions.  While  Capito  had  a  foul  reputation  for  extortion  and  loose

living, some people yet believed that he had withheld his hand from treason.

His officers, they supposed, had urged him to declare war, and, when they

could not persuade him, had gone on to charge him falsely with their own

offence, while Galba from weakness of character, or perhaps because he was

afraid to inquire too far, approved what had happened for good or for ill,

since it was past alteration. At any rate both executions were unpopular. Now

that Galba was disliked, everything he did, whether right or wrong, made him

more unpopular. His freedmen were all-powerful: money could do anything:

the slaves were thirsting for an upheaval, and with so elderly an emperor

were naturally expecting to see one soon. The evils of the new court were

those of the old, and while equally oppressive were not so easily excused.

Even Galba's age seemed comic and despicable to a populace that was used

to the young Nero and compared the emperors, as such people will, in pointof looks and personal attraction.

 
 

 
                            The Distribution of Forces

 
 

 
Such then at Rome was the variety of feeling natural in so vast a population.

To turn to the provinces abroad: Spain was under the command of Cluvius

Rufus, a man of great eloquence, and more skilled in the arts of peace than of

war. The Gallic provinces had not forgotten Vindex: moreover, they were

bound to Galba by his recent grant of Roman citizenship and his rebate of

their  tribute  for  the  future.  The  tribes,  however,  which  lay  nearest  to  the

armies stationed in Germany had not received these honours: some even had

lost part of their territory and were equally aggrieved at the magnitude of

their own injuries and of their neighbours' benefits. The troops in Germany

were proud of their recent victory, indignant at their treatment and perplexed

by a nervous consciousness that they had supported the wrong side: a very

dangerous state for so strong a force to be in. They had been slow to desert

Nero,  and  Verginius  did  not  immediately  declare  for  Galba.  Whether  he

really did not want the throne is doubtful: without question his soldiers made

him the offer. The death of Fonteius Capito aroused the indignation even of

those who had no right to complain. However, they still lacked a leader:

Galba had sent for Verginius under a pretence of friendship, and, when he

was not allowed to return and was even charged with treachery, the soldiers

considered his case their own.

 
The  army  of  Upper  Germany  felt  no  respect  for  their  commander,

Hordeonius Flaccus. Weakened by age and an affection of the feet he was

without resolution or authority, and could not have controlled the mildest

troops. These fiery spirits were only the further inflamed when they felt such

a weak hand on the reins. The legions of Lower Germany had been for some

time without a commander, until Aulus Vitellius appeared. He was the son of

the  Lucius  Vitellius  who  had  been  censor  and  thrice  consul,  and  Galba

thought this sufficient to impress the troops. The army in Britain showed no

bad  feeling.  All  through  the  disturbance  of  the  civil  wars  no  troops  kept

cleaner  hands.  This  may  have  been  because  they  were  so  far  away  and

severed by the sea, or perhaps frequent engagements had taught them to keeptheir  rancour  for  the  enemy.  Quiet  ruled  in  Illyricum  also,  although  the

legions, which had been summoned by Nero, while lingering in Italy had

made overtures to Verginius. But the armies lay far apart, always a sound

assistance  to  the  maintenance  of  military  discipline,  since  the  men  could

neither share vices nor join forces.

 
The  East  was  still  untroubled.  Licinius  Mucianus  held  Syria  with  four

legions. He was a man who was always famous, whether in good fortune or

in bad. As a youth he was ambitious and cultivated the friendship of the

great.  Later  he  found  himself  in  straitened  circumstances  and  a  very

ambiguous position, and, suspecting Claudius' displeasure, he withdrew into

the wilds of Asia, where he came as near to being an exile as afterwards to

being an emperor. He was a strange mixture of good and bad, of luxury and

industry, courtesy and arrogance. In leisure he was self-indulgent, but full of

vigour on service. His outward behaviour was praiseworthy, though ill was

spoken of his private life. However, with those who were under him or near

him, and with his colleagues he gained great influence by various devices,

and seems to have been the sort of man who would more readily make an

emperor than be one.

 
The Jewish war was being conducted by Flavius Vespasianus—appointed by

Nero—with three legions. He had no ill-will against Galba, and nothing to

hope from his fall. Indeed he had sent his son Titus to carry his compliments

and offer allegiance, an incident we must reserve for its proper place. It was

only  after  Vespasian's  rise  that  Roman  society  came  to  believe  in  the

mysterious movings of Providence, and supposed that portents and oracles

had predestined the throne for him and his family.

 
Of Egypt and its garrison, ever since the days of the sainted Augustus, the

knights of Rome have been uncrowned kings. The province being difficult to

reach, rich in crops, torn and tossed by fanaticism and sedition, ignorant of

law, unused to bureaucratic government, it seemed wiser to keep it in the

control of the Household. The governor at that date was Tiberius Alexander,

himself a native of Egypt. Africa and its legions, now that Clodius Macer had

been executed, were ready to put up with any ruler after their experience of a

petty master. The two Mauretanias, Raetia, Noricum, Thrace, and the other

provinces governed by procurators had their sympathies determined by the

neighbourhood of troops, and always caught their likes or dislikes from thestrongest army. The ungarrisoned provinces, and chief amongst these Italy,

were destined to be the prize of war, and lay at the mercy of any master. Such

was the state of the Roman world when Servius Galba, consul for the second

time, and Titus Vinius his colleague, inaugurated the year which was to be

their last, and almost the last for the commonwealth of Rome.

 
 

 
                The German Revolt and the Adoption of Piso

 
 

 
A  few  days  after  the  first  of  January  a  dispatch  arrived  from  Belgica,  in

which Pompeius Propinquus, the imperial agent, announced that the legions

of Upper Germany had broken their oath of allegiance and were clamouring

for a new emperor, but that by way of tempering their treason they referred

the final choice to the Senate and People of Rome. Galba had already been

deliberating and seeking advice as to the adoption of a successor, and this

occurrence hastened his plans. During all these months this question formed

the current subject of gossip throughout the country; Galba was far spent in

years and the general propensity for such a topic knew no check. Few people

showed sound judgement or any spirit of patriotism. Many were influenced

by foolish hopes and spread self-interested rumours pointing to some friend

or  patron,  thereby  also  gratifying  their  hatred  for  Titus  Vinius,  whose

unpopularity waxed daily with his power. Galba's affability only served to

strengthen  the  gaping  ambition  of  his  newly  powerful  friends,  for  his

weakness and credulity halved the risk and doubled the reward of treason.

 
The real power of the throne was divided between the consul, Titus Vinius,

and Cornelius Laco, the prefect of the Guards; and an influence as great was

enjoyed by Icelus, one of Galba's freedmen, who had been given the gold ring

and  was  now  greeted  by  the  name  of  Marcianus.  These  three  ordinarily

disagreed,  and  followed  each  his  own  interest  in  smaller  matters:  on  the

question of the succession they fell into two camps. Vinius was for Marcus

Otho. Laco and Icelus were agreed not so much on any one as on any other.

Galba was aware of the friendship between Otho and Vinius. Otho was a

bachelor and Vinius had an unmarried daughter: so gossip, never reticent,

pointed to them as father and son-in-law. Galba, one may suppose, felt some

concern for his country, too. Why take the throne from Nero, if it was to beleft to Otho? Otho had led a careless boyhood and a dissolute youth, and

endeared himself to Nero by aping his vices. Thus it was to Otho, as being

already  in  the  secret,  that  Nero  entrusted  his  favourite  mistress,  Poppaea

Sabina, until he could get rid of Octavia. Later he grew jealous and removed

Otho to the province of Lusitania under cover of a governorship. Otho had

been popular in his administration of the province, and was one of the first to

join Galba's party. Being a man of action and one of the most distinguished of

Galba's  officers  in  the  war,  when  once  he  had  conceived  the  hope  of

succeeding him, he eagerly indulged it. Most of the soldiers were on his side

and the Court supported him as Nero's double.

 
After receiving the news of the German revolt, although Galba knew nothing

for certain of Vitellius' plans, he was fearful to what lengths the outbreak of

the troops might go; so, being unable to trust the troops in the city, he had

recourse  to  what  seemed  his  sole  remedy  and  held  an  Imperial  Election.

Besides Vinius and Laco he summoned Marius Celsus, consul-elect and the

City-Prefect Ducenius Geminus. After prefacing a few words about his own

advanced age he ordered Piso Licinianus to be sent for, either on his own

initiative, or, as some believed, at the instance of Laco. Laco had met Piso at

Rubellius Plautus' house and they had formed a friendship, but he cunningly

pretended that he was supporting a stranger, and Piso's good repute gave

colour to this policy. Piso was a noble on both sides, being the son of Marcus

Crassus  and  Scribonia.  There  was  an  old-world  austerity  in  his  face  and

bearing, and just critics spoke of his strict morality: people who took a less

favourable view thought him soured. But while those who disliked this side

of his character carped at it, it was a recommendation in the eyes of the

emperor who intended to adopt him.

 
Galba is said to have taken Piso's hand and addressed him as follows: 'Were I

a private citizen, and were I to adopt you in the presence of the Priests by the

usual formality of a curial statute, it would be an honour for me to introduce

into my family a descendant of Cnaeus Pompeius and of Marcus Crassus, and

for you it would be a distinction to add to your noble ancestry the glories of

the Sulpician and Lutatian houses. As it is, I have been called by the consent

of gods and men to be an emperor. Your distinguished qualities and your

patriotism  have  persuaded  me  to  offer  to  you  peacefully  and  quietly  the

throne for which our ancestors fought on the field of battle, and which I too

won by war. In so doing I am following the precedent set by the saintedAugustus, who raised to the rank next himself first his nephew Marcellus,

then his son-in-law Agrippa, then his daughter's sons, and finally his stepson

Tiberius Nero. However, while Augustus looked for a successor in his own

family, I have searched throughout the country. Not that I lack either kinsmen

or supporters, but it was by no favour of birth that I myself came to the

throne, and, to prove my policy in this matter, consider how I have passed

over not only my own relatives but yours.

 
You have an elder brother, as noble as yourself. He would have been worthy

of this position, but you are worthier. You are old enough to have outlived

youthful passions. Your life has been such that you have nothing in your past

to excuse. So far you have only experienced misfortune. Prosperity probes

the heart with a keener touch; misery only calls for patience, but there is

corruption in success. Honesty, candour, and affection are the best of human

qualities, and doubtless you yourself have enough character to retain them.

But  the  complaisance  of  others  will  weaken  your  character.  Flattery  and

servile compliments will break down its defences and self-interest too, the

bane of all sincerity. What though you and I can talk plainly with each other

to-day?  Others  will  address  themselves  not  to  us  but  to  our  fortunes.  To

persuade an emperor what he ought to do is a laborious task: any one can

flatter him without a spark of sincerity.

 
'If the vast bulk of this empire could stand and keep its balance without a

guiding hand, the Republic might well have dated its birth from me. As it is,

things have long ago come to such a pass that neither I in my old age can give

the Roman people any better gift than a good successor, nor you in your

prime anything better than a good emperor. Under Tiberius, Caligula, and

Claudius,  Rome  was  the  heirloom  of  a  single  family.  There  is  a  kind  of

liberty in the free choice we have begun to exercise. Now that the Julian and

Claudian houses are extinct, by the plan of adoption the best man will always

be discovered. Royal birth is the gift of fortune, and is but valued as such. In

adoption we can use a free judgement, and if we wish to choose well, the

voice of the country points the way. Think of Nero, swollen with the pride of

his long line of royal ancestry. It was not Vindex with a powerless province

at his back, nor I with a single legion that freed Rome's shoulders of that

burden: it was his own cruelty and profligacy. And that was before there was

any precedent for the conviction of an emperor.

 'We have been called to the throne by the swords of those who thought us

worthy. Our high state will not escape the eye of envy. You may be sure of

that. But there is no reason for you to feel alarm because in this world-wide

upheaval a couple of legions have not yet settled down. I myself did not

succeed to a safe and peaceful throne, and, when once the news of your

adoption is spread, I shall cease to be charged with my advanced age, which

is now the only fault they find in me. The rascals will always miss Nero: you

and I have got to see that good citizens do not miss him too.

 
'A longer sermon would ill befit the time and I have fulfilled my purpose, if I

have done right in choosing you. The soundest and easiest criterion of right

and  wrong  policy  is  to  consider  what  you  would  have  approved  or

condemned in another emperor. For Rome is not like the nations which are

ruled by kings, where one house is supreme and the rest are slaves. Your

future subjects are men who cannot endure the extremes either of bondage or

of freedom.' Galba spoke these words and more to the same effect in the tone

of  one  creating  an  emperor:  the  rest  addressed  Piso  as  though  he  were

emperor already.

 
He is said to have betrayed no sign of amazement or elation either before

those who were then present, or later when everybody's eyes centred upon

him. His language to his emperor and adoptive father was deeply respectful

and he spoke modestly of himself. He made no change in his expression or

bearing, showing himself more able than anxious to rule. A discussion then

took place whether the adoption should be announced before the people or in

the senate, or in the guards' camp. They decided in favour of the camp, on the

ground that it would be a compliment to the troops, whose goodwill was hard

to win by flattery or bribes, but was by no means to be despised, if it could be

won by good means. Meanwhile the curiosity of the populace, impatient of

any important secret, had brought together crowds all round the Palace, and

when  once  the  rumour  began  to  leak  out  an  attempt  at  suppression  only

resulted in spreading it.

 
The tenth of January was a dreary wet day, and an extraordinary storm of

thunder  and  lightning  showed  the  displeasure  of  Providence.  Such

phenomena were regarded in old days as a sign for the suspension of public

business, but they did not deter Galba from proceeding to the camp. Either he

disregarded such things as the result of pure chance or else he felt that theblows of fate may be foretold but not forestalled. He addressed a crowded

assembly of the soldiers with true imperial brevity, stating simply that in

adopting Piso he was following the example of the sainted Augustus, and the

old military custom whereby each man chose another. He was afraid that by

suppressing  the  news  of  the  German  rebellion  he  might  only  seem  to

exaggerate the danger, so he voluntarily declared that the Fourth and Twenty-

second legions had been led by a few traitors into seditious murmurings but

no further, and would soon return to their allegiance. He made no attempt to

enhance his words either by eloquence or largess. However, the tribunes and

centurions and those of the soldiers who stood nearest to him gave well-

sounding answers. The rest were sorry and silent, for the war seemed to have

lost them the largess that had always been usual even in peace. Everybody

agrees that they could have been won over had the parsimonious old emperor

made  the  least  display  of  generosity.  He  was  ruined  by  his  strict  old-

fashioned inflexibility, which seems too rigorous for these degenerate days.

 
From  the  camp  they  proceeded  to  the  senate,  and  Galba's  speech  to  its

members was no fuller or finer than to the soldiers. Piso spoke graciously,

and there was no lack of support in the senate. Many wished him well. Those

who  did  not  were  the  more  effusive.  The  majority  were  indifferent,  but

displayed  a  ready  affability,  intent  on  their  private  speculations  without

thought  of  the  country's  good.  No  other  public  action  is  reported  of  Piso

during  the  four  days  which  intervened  between  his  adoption  and

assassination.

 
 

 
                        Galba's Measures of Precaution

 
 

 
Reports of the German rebellion grew daily more insistent and the public was

always  ready  to  believe  any  news,  provided  it  was  bad.  Accordingly  the

senate decided that a commission must be sent to the army in Germany. It

was discussed in private whether Piso should go himself to add dignity to the

commission, since he could carry the authority of the emperor, while the

others represented the senate. It was also proposed to send Laco, the prefect

of the Guards, but he objected. The senate had allowed Galba to nominate the

commissioners  and  he  showed  the  most  miserable  indecision,  nownominating members, now excusing them, now making exchanges, yielding

always  to  pressure  from  people  who  wanted  to  go  or  to  stay  at  home

according as they were determined by their hopes or their fears.

 
The next question was one of finance. After investigating all possible sources

it seemed most reasonable to recover the revenue from those quarters where

the  cause  of  the  deficit  lay.  Nero  had  squandered  in  lavish  presents  two

thousand two hundred million sesterces. Galba gave instructions that these

monies should be recovered from the individual recipients, leaving each a

tithe of their original gift. However, in each case there was scarcely a tenth

part left, for these worthless spendthrifts had run through Nero's money as

freely as they had squandered their own: they had no real property or capital

left, nothing but the apparatus of their luxury. Thirty of the knights were

entrusted with the duty of recovering the money. This commission, for which

there was no precedent, proved vastly unpopular owing to the scope of its

authority, and the large number of the victims. Every quarter seemed beset

with sales and brokers and lawsuits. And yet lively satisfaction was caused by

the discovery that the beneficiaries of Nero's bounty were as poor as the

victims of his greed.

 
At this time several officers were cashiered, Antonius Taurus and Antonius

Naso  of  the  Guards,  Aemilius  Pacensis  of  the  City  Garrison,  and  Julius

Fronto of the Police. However, this proved no remedy. The others only began

to feel alarmed, thinking that Galba's craft and timidity had sacrificed a few,

while his suspicions rested on them all.

 
 

 
                                  The Rise of Otho

 
 

 
Meanwhile Otho had nothing to hope from a peaceful settlement: all his plans

demanded a disturbance. Many motives spurred him on: his extravagance

would have ruined a prince, and his poverty have perplexed a private person:

he was angry with Galba and jealous of Piso. He also alleged fears for his

safety, by way of whetting his ambition. 'I proved a nuisance to Nero,' he

would  say,  'and  can  scarcely  expect  the  compliment  of  a  second  exile  to

Lusitania.  Besides,  monarchs  always  hate  and  suspect  the  man  who  ismentioned as "next to the throne". This was what did me harm with the old

emperor, and it will weigh still more with the youthful Piso, who is naturally

savage and has been exasperated by a long period of exile. It would be easy

to kill me. I must do and dare while Galba's authority is on the wane and

Piso's not yet established. These times of change suit big enterprises; inaction

is more deadly than daring; there is no call for delay. Death is the natural end

for all alike, and the only difference is between fame and oblivion afterwards.

Seeing that the same end awaits the innocent and the guilty, a man of spirit

should at least deserve his fate.'

 
Otho's character was by no means so effeminate as his person. His intimate

freedmen  and  slaves,  who  were  allowed  a  licence  unusual  in  private

households,  dangled  before  him  the  baits  for  which  he  was  greedy:  the

luxuries of Nero's Court, the marriages he could make, the adulteries he could

commit, and all the other imperial pleasures. They were his, they pointed out,

if he would bestir himself; it was shameful to lie quiet and leave them to

others. He was also incited by the astrologers, who declared that their study

of the stars pointed to great changes and a year of glory for Otho. Creatures

of this class always deceive the ambitious, though those in power distrust

them. Probably we shall go on for ever proscribing them and keeping them

by us.

 
Poppaea had always had her boudoir full of these astrologers, the worst kind

of outfit for a royal ménage. One of them, called Ptolemy, had gone with

Otho to Spain and foretold that he would outlive Nero. This came true and

Otho  believed  in  him.  He  now  based  his  vague  conjectures  on  the

computations of Galba's age and Otho's youth, and persuaded him that he

would  ascend  the  throne.  But,  though  the  man  had  no  real  skill,  Otho

accepted the prophecy as if it was the finger of fate. Human nature always

likes to believe what it cannot understand. Nor was Ptolemy himself slow to

incite  his  master  to  crime,  to  which  it  is  only  a  short  step  from  such

ambitions.  But  whether  his  criminal  designs  were  deliberate  or  suddenly

conceived, it is impossible to say. He had long been courting the goodwill of

the soldiers either in the hope of being adopted by Galba or to prepare the

way for treason. On the road from Spain, while the men were marching or on

outpost duty, he would address the veterans by name, reminding them how he

and they had served together under Nero, and calling them his comrades. He

renewed acquaintance with some, asked after others and helped them withmoney  or  influence,  frequently  letting  fall  complaints  and  ambiguous

remarks about Galba, using all the arts which work upon uneducated minds.

The soldiers grumbled bitterly at the exertions of the march, the shortage of

provisions, and the strict discipline. What they were used to was a journey to

the Campanian Lakes or Greek seaports on board ship; they found it hard to

struggle over the Pyrenees and Alps, and march immense distances under

arms.

 
While the soldiers were thus already fired with discontent, Maevius Pudens,

one of Tigellinus' intimates, added fuel to their feelings by luring on all who

were naturally unstable or in need of money, or rashly eager for a change.

Eventually,  whenever  Galba  dined  with  him,  Otho  went  the  length  of

presenting a hundred sesterces to each of the soldiers on guard, on the pretext

that this was instead of entertaining them. This system of public largess Otho

extended by making presents in confidence to individuals, and such spirit did

he  show  in  bribery  that  when  a  member  of  the  Body  Guard,  Cocceius

Proculus,  brought  an  action  to  claim  part  of  his  neighbour's  farm,  Otho

bought the whole property out of his own pocket and gave it to him. He was

enabled to do this by the inefficiency of the Prefect Laco, who was no less

blind to notorious than to secret scandals.

 
Otho then put Onomastus, one of his freedmen, in charge of the projected

crime, and Onomastus took into his confidence Barbius Proculus, an aide-de-

camp,  and  a  subaltern  named  Veturius,  both  in  the  Body  Guard.  Having

assured himself by many interviews that they were both bold and cunning,

Otho proceeded to load them with bribes and promises, providing them with

funds to enable them to test the feelings of the others. And so a couple of

common soldiers took it upon them to transfer the Roman Empire: and they

did it. A very few were admitted as accomplices. These, by various devices,

worked on the indecision of the others. The non-commissioned officers who

had  been  promoted  by  Nymphidius  felt  themselves  under  suspicion;  the

private soldiers were indignant and in despair at the constant postponement of

Galba's largess; some few were fired by the recollection of Nero's régime and

longed for the days of licence; all in common shared the fear of being drafted

out of the Praetorian Guards.

 
The infection of treason soon spread to the legions and auxiliaries, whose

excitement  had  been  aroused  as  soon  as  they  heard  that  the  armies  ofGermany were wavering in their allegiance. So, as the disloyal were ready for

treason and the loyal shut their eyes, they at first determined to acclaim Otho

as he was returning from dinner on the night of the fourteenth. However, they

hesitated: the darkness spelt uncertainty, the troops were scattered all over the

town, and unanimity could scarcely be expected from drunken men. They

were not deterred by any affection for their country's honour, which they

were deliberately preparing to stain with its emperor's blood, but they were

afraid that, as Otho was unknown to the majority, some one else might by

mistake  be  offered  to  the  Pannonian  or  German  legions  and  proclaimed

emperor.  Some  evidence  of  the  brewing  plot  leaked  out,  but  it  was

suppressed by the conspirators. Rumours even reached Galba's ears, but Laco

made light of them, being totally ignorant of soldiers' characters, hostile to

any suggestion, however wise, that was not his own, and extremely obstinate

with men who knew more than he did.

 
On January 15, as Galba was sacrificing in front of the temple of Apollo, the

priest Umbricius declared the omens unfavourable: treason was impending,

and  an  enemy  within  the  walls.  Otho,  who  was  standing  beside  Galba,

overheard and construed the omen as being from his own point of view a

good  one,  favourable  to  his  plans.  In  a  few  moments  his  freedman,

Onomastus, announced that the architect and contractors were waiting to see

him. This had been agreed upon as the signal that the troops were assembling

and  the  conspiracy  was  ripe.  On  being  asked  where  he  was  going,  Otho

pretended that he was buying an old property, but suspected its condition and

so had to inspect it first. Thus, leaning on his freedman's shoulder, he passed

through  Tiberius'  house  into  the  Velabrum  and  thence  to  the  Golden

Milestone at the foot of the Temple of Saturn. There thirty-three soldiers of

the  Body  Guard  saluted  him  as  emperor.  When  he  showed  alarm  at  the

smallness of their number they put him hastily into a litter, and, drawing their

swords, hurried him away. About the same number of soldiers joined them on

the  way,  some  accomplices,  others  merely  curious.  Some  marched  along

shouting and flourishing swords; others kept silent, intending to take their cue

from subsequent events.

 
Julius Martialis was the tribune on duty in the camp. He was so overcome by

the magnitude of this unexpected crime and so afraid that the treason was

widespread  in  the  camp,  and  that  he  might  be  killed  if  he  offered  any

opposition, that he led most people to suppose he was in the plot. So, too, theother tribunes and centurions all preferred present safety to a risky loyalty. In

fact the general attitude was this: few dared to undertake so foul a crime,

many wished to see it done, and everybody was ready to condone it.

 
 

 
                                  The Fall of Galba

 
 

 
Meanwhile Galba in total ignorance and intent upon his sacrifices continued

to importune the gods of an empire that had already ceased to be his. First

there came a rumour that some one or other of the senators was being hurried

to the camp, then that it was Otho. Immediately people who had met Otho

came flocking in from all quarters of Rome; some in their terror exaggerated

the  truth,  some  minimized  it,  remembering  even  then  to  flatter.  After

discussion it was decided that the temper of the cohort on guard in the palace

should be tested, but not by Galba himself. His authority was held in reserve

for more heroic remedies. The troops were summoned. Piso, standing out on

the steps of the palace, addressed them as follows:

 
'Fellow  soldiers,  it  is  now  five  days  since  I  was  made  a  Caesar.  I  knew

nothing of the future nor whether the name was more to be desired or feared.

It  now  lies  with  you  to  decide  whether  or  no  my  adoption  is  to  prove  a

calamity for my house and for my country. In saying this, I do not dread

disaster  on  my  own  account.  I  have  known  misfortune,  and  I  am  now

discovering to the full that prosperity is just as dangerous. But for the sake of

my adoptive father, of the senate, and of the whole empire, I deplore the

thought that we may have to-day either to die or—what for good men is as

wretched—to kill. In the recent revolution our comfort was that Rome was

spared the sight of blood, and the transfer was effected without disturbance.

We thought that my adoption would be a safeguard against an outbreak of

civil war even after Galba's death.

 
'I will make no claims to rank or respectability. To compare myself with

Otho, I need not recite my virtues. His vices are all he has to be proud of.

They  ruined  the  empire,  even  when  he  was  only  playing  the  part  of  an

emperor's friend. Why should he deserve to be emperor? For his swaggering

demeanour?  For  his  effeminate  costume?  Extravagance  imposes  on  somepeople. They take it for liberality. They are wrong. He will know how to

squander money, but not how to give it away. His mind is full of lechery and

debauchery and intrigues with women. These are in his eyes the prerogatives

of the throne. And the pleasure of his vices would be all his, the blushes of

shame would be ours. No man has ever ruled well who won the throne by bad

means.

 
'The whole Roman world agreed to give Galba the title of Caesar. Galba with

your approval gave that title to me. Even if the "country", the "senate", the

"people", are empty terms, it is to your interest, my fellow soldiers, to see that

it is not the rascals who create an emperor. From time to time one hears of the

legionaries being in mutiny against their generals. But your good faith and

your  good  name  have  stood  to  this  day  unimpaired.  It  was  not  you  who

deserted  Nero:  he  deserted  you.  Are  you  going  to  allow  less  than  thirty

deserters and renegades to bestow the crown? Why! no one would tolerate

their choosing so much as a centurion or a tribune for themselves. Are you

going to allow this precedent, and by your acquiescence make their crime

your  own?  You  will  soon  see  this  lawless  spirit  spreading  to  the  troops

abroad, and in time the treason will recoil on us and the war on you. Besides,

innocence wins you as much as the murder of your emperor: you will get

from us as large a bounty for your loyalty as you would from others for your

crime.'

 
The members of the Body Guard dispersed. The rest of the cohort paid some

heed to his speech. Aimlessly, as happens in moments of confusion, they

seized  their  standards,  without  as  yet  any  fixed  plan,  and  not,  as  was

afterwards  believed,  to  cloak  their  treachery.  Marius  Celsus  had  been

dispatched  to  the  picked  detachments  of  the  Illyrian  army,  which  were

quartered in the Vipsanian arcade, while instructions had been given to two

senior centurions, Amullius Serenus and Domitius Sabinus, to summon the

German  troops  from  the  Hall  of  Liberty.  They  distrusted  the  legion  of

marines, who had been alienated by Galba's butchery of their comrades on his

entry  into  Rome.  Three  officers  of  the  guards,  Cetrius  Severus,  Subrius

Dexter, and Pompeius Longinus, also hurried to the camp in the hope that the

mutiny was still in its early stages and might be averted by good advice

before  it  came  to  a  head.  The  soldiers  attacked  Subrius  and  Cetrius  with

threats and forcibly seizing Longinus disarmed him, because he had not come

in virtue of his military rank, but simply as one of Galba's private friends; andfor his loyalty to his master the rebels disliked him all the more. The marines

without  any  hesitation  joined  the  guards.  The  Illyrian  draft  drove  Celsus

away at the point of their javelins. The German detachments wavered for

some time. They were still in poor condition physically, and inclined to be

passive. Nero had dispatched them as an advance-guard to Alexandria; the

long voyage back again had damaged their health, and Galba had spared no

expense in looking after them.

 
The whole populace of Rome was now crowding into the palace together

with a good sprinkling of slaves. With discordant shouts they demanded the

death of Otho and the doom of the conspirators. They might have been in the

circus or the theatre, clamouring for entertainment. There was neither sense

nor sincerity in their behaviour. They were quite ready on the same day to

clamour for the opposite with equal zeal.

 
But it is an established custom to flatter any emperor with unbridled cheering

and  meaningless  enthusiasm.  Meanwhile  Galba  was  torn  between  two

opinions.  Titus  Vinius  maintained  that  they  ought  to  remain  within  the

palace,  employ  the  slaves  to  offer  resistance  and  block  up  all  the  doors,

instead of going out to face the angry troops. 'This will give time,' he urged,

'for the disloyal to repent and the loyal to unite their forces. Crimes demand

haste, good counsels profit by delay. Besides, if need be, we shall have the

same chance of leaving the palace later: if we leave and repent of it, it will

not be in our power to return.'

 
All  the  others  voted  for  immediate  action  before  the  conspiracy  gathered

strength and numbers. 'Otho,' they argued, 'will soon lose heart. He crept

away by stealth and was introduced in a litter to a parcel of strangers, and

now because we dally and waste time he has leisure to rehearse his part of

emperor. What is the good of waiting until Otho sets his camp in order and

approaches the Capitol, while Galba peeps out of a window? Are this famous

general and his gallant friends to shut the doors and not to stir a foot over the

threshold, as if they were anxious to endure a siege? Much help may we hope

from slaves, when once the unwieldy crowd loses its unity and their first

indignation, which counts for so much, begins to cool. No, cowardice is too

risky. Or if we must fall, let us meet the danger half-way, and cover Otho

with disgrace, ourselves with honour.' When Vinius resisted this proposal,

Laco, prompted by Icelus, assailed him with threats, persisting in his privatequarrel to the ruin of his country.

 
Galba without further delay supported those whose plan would look best.

However, Piso was first dispatched to the camp. The young man had a great

name, his popularity was still fresh, and moreover, he disliked Titus Vinius,

or, if he did not, Vinius' enemies hoped he did: it is so easy to believe in

hatred. Scarcely had Piso departed, when there arrived a rumour that Otho

had  been  killed  in  the  camp.  At  first  it  was  vague  and  uncertain,  but

eventually, as so often happens with daring lies, people began to assert that

they  had  been  present  and  seen  the  deed.  Some  were  glad  and  some

indifferent, so the news gained easy credence. Many, however, thought that

the report had been concocted and disseminated by friends of Otho, who now

mingled in the crowd and tried to lure Galba out by spreading this agreeable

falsehood. At this point not only the populace and the inexperienced mob but

many  of  the  knights  and  senators  as  well  broke  out  into  applause  and

unbridled enthusiasm. With their fear they had lost their caution. Breaking

open the palace gates they rushed in and presented themselves before Galba,

complaining that they had been forestalled in the task of revenge. All the

cowards who, as events proved, could show no pluck in action, indulged in

excessive heroics and lip-courage. Nobody knew, everybody talked. At last,

for lack of the truth, Galba yielded to the consensus of error. When he had

put on his breastplate he was lifted into a chair, for he was too old and infirm

to stand against the crowds that kept flocking in. In the palace he was met by

Julius  Atticus,  of  the  Body  Guard,  who  displayed  a  dripping  sword  and

shouted out that he had killed Otho. 'Comrade,' said Galba, 'who bade you?'

Galba had a remarkable power of curbing soldiers' presumption, for he was

not afraid of threats nor moved by flattery.

 
Meanwhile in Otho's camp there was no longer any doubt of the soldiers'

unanimity.  Such  was  their  enthusiasm  that  they  were  not  content  with

carrying  Otho  shoulder-high  in  procession;  they  placed  him  among  the

standards on the platform, where shortly before a gilt statue of Galba had

stood, and made a ring round him with their colours. Tribunes and centurions

were allowed no approach: the common soldiers even called out, 'Beware of

the  officers.'  The  whole  camp  resounded  with  confused  shouts  of  mutual

encouragement. It was quite unlike the wavering and spiritless flattery of a

civil mob. As new adherents streamed in, directly a soldier caught sight of

one of them, he grasped him by the hand, flung his arms round him, kept himat  his  side,  and  dictated  the  oath  of  allegiance.  Some  commended  their

general to his soldiers, and some the soldiers to their general. Otho, for his

part, was not slow to greet the crowd with outstretched hand and throw kisses

to them. In every way he played the slave to gain a throne. When the whole

legion  of  the  marines  had  sworn  allegiance,  he  gained  confidence  in  his

strength,  and,  considering  that  those  whom  he  had  incited  individually

needed a few words of general encouragement, he stood out on the rampart

and began as follows:—

 
'In what guise I come forward to address you, Fellow Soldiers, I cannot tell.

Dubbed  emperor  by  you,  I  dare  not  call  myself  a  private  citizen:  yet

"emperor" I cannot say with another on the throne. And what am I to call

you? That too will remain in doubt until it is decided whether you have here

in your camp an enemy or an emperor of Rome. You hear how they clamour

at once for my death and your punishment. So clear is it that we must fall or

stand  together.  Doubtless  Galba—such  is  his  clemency—has  already

promised our destruction. Is he not the man who without the least excuse

butchered thousands of utterly innocent soldiers? I shudder whenever I recall

his ghastly entry into the city, when before the face of Rome he ordered the

decimation of the troops whom at their humble petition he had taken under

his protection. That is Galba's only "victory". These were the auspices under

which he made his entry; and what glory has he brought to the throne he

occupies, save the murder of Obultronius Sabinus and Cornelius Marcellus in

Spain, of Betuus Cilo in Gaul, of Fonteius Capito in Germany, of Clodius

Macer in Africa, of Cingonius on his march to Rome, of Turpilianus in the

city, and of Nymphidius in the camp? What province is there in the empire

that has not been polluted with massacre? He calls it "salutary correction".

For his "remedies" are what other people call crimes: his cruelty is disguised

as  "austerity",  his  avarice  as  "economy",  while  by  "discipline"  he  means

punishing and insulting you. It is but seven months since Nero's death, and

already  Icelus  alone  has  embezzled  more  than  all  the  depredations  of

Polyclitus and Vatinius and Aegialus put together. Why, Vinius would have

been less greedy and lawless had he been emperor himself. As it is, he treats

us as his own subjects and despises us as Galba's. His own fortune alone

could provide the largess which they daily cast in your teeth but never pay

into your pocket.

 
'Nor in Galba's successor either is there any hope for you. Galba has seen tothat. He has recalled from exile the man whose avarice and sour temper he

judged most like his own. You witnessed for yourselves, my comrades, the

extraordinary storm which signified Heaven's abhorrence at that ill-starred

adoption. The Senate and People of Rome feel the same. They are counting

on  your  courage.  You  alone  can  give  strength  to  the  right  policy:  it  is

powerless without you, however good it be. It is not to war and danger that I

call you. All the troops are with us. That single plain-clothes cohort is no

longer a defence to Galba, but a hindrance. When once they have caught sight

of you, when once they come to take their orders from me, the only quarrel

between you will be who can do most to put me in their debt. There is no

room for delay in plans which cannot be commended until they are put into

action.'

 
Otho then gave orders to open the arsenal. The soldiers immediately seized

their arms in such haste that all the ordinary distinctions of the service were

neglected:  neither  Guards  nor  Legionaries  carried  their  own  arms:  in  the

confusion they took the helmets and shields of the auxiliaries. There were no

tribunes or centurions to encourage them: each man followed his own lead,

and the rascals found their chief incentive in the consternation of the loyal.

 
As the riot increased, Piso, alarmed by the din of their shouts, which could be

heard even in the city, had overtaken Galba, who had meanwhile left the

palace and was approaching the Forum. Marius Celsus had also brought back

no good news. Some were for returning to the palace, others for seeking the

shelter  of  the  Capitol,  many  for  seizing  the  Rostra.  The  majority  merely

disagreed with other people's proposals, and, as so often happens in these

disasters, the best course always seemed the one for which it was now too

late.  It  is  said  that  Laco,  without  Galba's  knowledge,  proposed  the

assassination of Titus Vinius, either with the idea that his execution would be

a sop to the soldiers, or because he believed him Otho's accomplice, or, as a

last alternative, hatred may have been his motive. However, the time and the

place both bred scruples; when killing once begins it is difficult to set a limit:

besides, their plans were upset by the arrival of terrified messengers, by the

continual  desertion  of  their  supporters,  and  by  a  general  waning  of

enthusiasm even among those who at first had been the keenest to display

their loyalty and courage.

 
Galba  was  driven  hither  and  thither  by  the  tide  of  the  surging  mob.  Thetemples and public buildings were crowded with spectators, who viewed a

sorry  scene.  No  shouts  came  from  the  crowd:  astonishment  was  on  their

faces, and their ears open to every sound. There was neither uproar nor quiet,

but the silence of strong emotion and alarm. However, a report reached Otho

that the populace was arming. He bade his men fly headlong to forestall the

danger.  Off  went  the  Roman  soldiers  as  if  they  were  going  to  drag

Vologaesus or Pacorus from the ancestral throne of the Arsacids—and not to

butcher  their  own  emperor,  a  helpless  old  man.  Armed  to  the  teeth,  they

broke at a full gallop into the Forum, scattering the populace and trampling

senators under foot. Neither the sight of the Capitol nor the sanctity of the

temples towering above them, nor the thought of Roman emperors past and to

come, could avail to deter them from committing that crime which the next

successor always avenges.

 
Seeing the armed ranks now close at hand, the standard-bearer of the cohort

on guard over Galba —tradition says his name was Atilius Vergilio—tore off

the medallion of Galba and flung it to the ground. This signal clearly showed

that all the troops were for Otho: the people fled from the deserted Forum and

swords were drawn against any who lingered. Near 'Lake Curtius' Galba was

precipitated  from  his  chair  by  the  panic-stricken  haste  of  the  bearers  and

flung to the ground. The accounts of his last words vary according as they are

prompted by hatred or admiration. Some say that he whined and asked what

harm he had deserved, begging for a few days' respite to pay the troops their

largess. The majority say that he offered his neck to the blow and bade them,

'Come, strike, if it serves the country's need.' Whatever he said mattered little

to his assassins. As to the actual murderer there is a difference of opinion.

Some say it was Terentius, a reservist, others that his name was Laecanius.

The most common account is that a soldier of the Fifteenth legion, by name

Camurius, pierced his throat with a sword-thrust. The others foully mangled

his  arms  and  legs  (his  breast  was  covered)  and  with  bestial  savagery

continued to stab the headless corpse.

 
Then they made for Titus Vinius. Here, too, there is a doubt whether the fear

of imminent death strangled his voice, or whether he called out that they had

no mandate from Otho to kill him. He may have invented this in his terror, or

it may have been a confession of his complicity in the plot. His whole life

and reputation give reason to suppose that he was an accomplice in the crime

of which he was the cause. He was brought to the ground in front of thetemple of Julius by a blow on the knee, and afterwards a common soldier

named Julius Carus ran him through with a sword.

 
However, Rome found one hero that day. This was Sempronius Densus, a

centurion of the Guards, who had been told off by Galba to protect Piso.

Drawing his dagger he faced the armed assassins, flinging their treason in

their teeth, and by his shouts and gestures turned their attention upon himself,

thus enabling Piso to escape despite his wounds. Piso, reaching the temple of

Vesta, was mercifully sheltered by the verger, who hid him in his lodging.

There, no reverence for this sanctuary but merely his concealment postponed

his immediate death. Eventually, Otho, who was burning to have him killed,

dispatched as special agents, Sulpicius Florus of the British cohorts, a man

whom  Galba  had  recently  enfranchised,  and  Statius  Murcus  of  the  Body

Guard. They dragged Piso forth and butchered him on the threshold of the

temple.

 
 

 
                                Otho on the Throne

 
 

 
None of his murders pleased Otho so much as this. On Piso's head, as on no

other, they say, he gazed with insatiable eyes. This was possibly the first

moment at which he felt relieved of all anxiety, and free to indulge his glee;

or perhaps, in the case of Galba and of Vinius, the recollection of his treason

to  the  one  and  of  his  former  friendship  with  the  other  troubled  even  his

unfeeling heart with gloomy thoughts, whereas, Piso being an enemy and a

rival, he considered it a pious duty to gloat over his murder. Their heads were

fixed on poles and carried along with the standards of the cohorts side by side

with the eagle of the legion. Those who had done the deed and those who had

witnessed  it  vied  with  each  other  in  displaying  their  bloody  hands,  all

boasting of their share—some falsely, some truly—as if it were a fine and

memorable  exploit.  Vitellius  subsequently  discovered  more  than  120

petitions demanding rewards for distinguished services rendered on that day.

He gave orders to search out all the petitioners and put them to death. This

was from no respect for Galba: he merely followed the traditional custom by

which princes secure their present safety and posthumous vengeance.

 The senate and people seemed different men. There was a general rush for the

camp, every one shouldering his neighbour and trying to overtake those in

front. They heaped insults on Galba, praised the prudence of the troops, and

covered Otho's hand with kisses, their extravagance varying inversely with

their sincerity. Otho rebuffed no one, and succeeded by his words and looks

in moderating the menace of the soldiers' greed for vengeance. They loudly

demanded  the  execution  of  Marius  Celsus,  the  consul-elect,  who  had

remained Galba's faithful friend to the last. They were as much offended at

his efficiency and honesty as if these had been criminal qualities. What they

wanted was obviously to find a first excuse for plunder and murder and the

destruction of all decent citizens. But Otho had as yet no influence to prevent

crimes: he could only order them. So he simulated anger, giving instructions

for Celsus' arrest, and by promising that he should meet with a worse penalty,

thus rescued him from immediate death.

 
The  will  of  the  soldiers  was  now  henceforward  supreme.  The  Praetorian

Guards chose their own prefects, Plotius Firmus, a man who had risen from

the ranks to the post of Chief of Police, and joined Otho's side before Galba's

fall,  and  Licinius  Proculus,  an  intimate  friend  of  Otho,  and  therefore

suspected of furthering his plans. They made Flavius Sabinus prefect of the

city, therein following Nero's choice, under whom Sabinus had held that post;

besides, most of them had an eye to the fact that he was Vespasian's brother.

An urgent demand arose that the customary fees to centurions for granting

furlough should be abolished, for they constituted a sort of annual tax upon

the common soldier. The result had been that a quarter of each company

could go off on leave or lounge idly about the barracks, so long as they paid

the centurion his fee, nor was there any one to control either the amount of

this impost or the means by which the soldiers raised the money: highway

robbery  or  menial  service  was  the  usual  resort  whereby  they  purchased

leisure. Then, again, a soldier who had money was savagely burdened with

work until he should buy exemption. Thus he soon became impoverished and

enervated by idleness, and returned to his company no longer a man of means

and energy but penniless and lazy. So the process went on. One after another

they became deteriorated by poverty and lax discipline, rushing blindly into

quarrels and mutiny, and, as a last resource, into civil war. Otho was afraid of

alienating  the  centurions  by  his  concessions  to  the  rank  and  file,  and

promised to pay the annual furlough-fees out of his private purse. This wasindubitably a sound reform, which good emperors have since established as a

regular custom in the army. The prefect Laco he pretended to banish to an

island,  but  on  his  arrival  he  was  stabbed  by  a  reservist  whom  Otho  had

previously dispatched for that purpose. Marcianus Icelus, as being one of his

own freedmen, he sentenced to public execution.

 
Thus the day was spent in crimes, and worst of all was the joy they caused.

The senate was summoned by the urban praetor. The other magistrates all

vied in flattery. The senators arrived post-haste. They decreed to Otho the

powers  of  the  tribunate,  the  title  of  Augustus,  and  all  the  imperial

prerogatives.  Their  unanimous  object  was  to  blot  out  all  recollection  of

former insults; but, as these had been hurled equally from all sides, they did

not,  as  far  as  any  one  could  see,  stick  in  his  memory.  Whether  he  had

forgotten  them  or  only  postponed  punishment,  his  reign  was  too  short  to

show. He was then carried through the still reeking Forum among the piles of

dead bodies to the Capitol, and thence to the palace. He granted permission to

burn and bury the bodies of his victims.

 
Piso's wife Verania and his brother Scribonianus laid out his body, and this

was done for Vinius by his daughter Crispina. They had to search for the

heads and buy them back from the murderers, who had preserved them for

sale.

 
 

 
                                  Dramatis Personae

 
 

 
Piso was in his thirty-first year. His reputation was better than his fortune.

His brothers had been executed, Magnus by Claudius, Crassus by Nero. He

himself after being long in exile was a Caesar for four days. Hastily adopted

in preference to his elder brother, the only advantage he reaped was to be

killed first.

 
Titus  Vinius  in  his  fifty-seven  years  had  displayed  strange  contrasts  of

character. His father belonged to a family of praetorian rank; his mother's

father was one of the proscribed. A scandal marked his first military service

under  the  general  Calvisius  Sabinus.  The  general's  wife  suffered  from  a

suspicious desire to inspect the arrangements of the camp, which she enteredby night disguised in soldier's uniform. There she brazenly interfered with the

guard and the soldiers on duty, and eventually had the effrontery to commit

adultery in the general's own quarters. The man convicted of implication in

this  scandal  was  Titus  Vinius.  He  was  therefore  put  in  irons  by  order  of

Caligula. However, the fortunes of the time soon changed and he was set at

liberty. After mounting the ladder of office without check, he was as an ex-

praetor  given  the  command  of  a  legion,  and  proved  successful.  But  soon

again he soiled his reputation, and laid himself under the charge of having

been mean enough to steal a gold cup from Claudius' dinner-table. Claudius

gave orders that on the next day Vinius alone of all his guests should be

served  on  earthenware.  However,  as  pro-consul,  Vinius'  government  of

Narbonese  Gaul  was  strict  and  honest.  Subsequently  his  friendship  with

Galba brought him into danger. He was bold, cunning, and efficient, with

great power for good or for evil, according to his mood. Vinius' will was

annulled because of his great wealth. Piso was poor, so his last wishes were

respected.

 
Galba's body lay long neglected, and under cover of darkness was subjected

to various insults. Eventually his steward Argius, one of his former slaves,

gave it a humble burial in his private garden. His head, which the camp-

followers and servants had mangled and carried on a pole, was found next

day in front of the tomb of Patrobius (one of Nero's freedmen whom Galba

had executed) and buried with the body which had already been cremated.

Such was the end of Servius Galba, who for seventy-three years had enjoyed

prosperity under five different emperors, happier in their reign than his own.

He came of an old and noble family and possessed great wealth. His own

character was mediocre, rather free from vices than rich in virtues. Though

not indifferent to fame, he did not court it by advertisement. Not greedy of

other people's money, he was careful of his own, and a miser with public

funds. His attitude towards friends and freedmen, if they were honest, was

one of kindly complaisance; when they were not, he was culpably blind. But

his  distinguished  origin  and  the  peculiar  perils  of  the  time  disguised  his

apathy, which passed as prudence. In the flower of his youth he served with

distinction in Germany. As pro-consul he governed Africa wisely, and in later

years showed the same equity in Nearer Spain. When he was a commoner he

seemed too big for his station, and had he never been emperor, no one would

have doubted his ability to reign. 
 

 
                                The Rise of Vitellius

 
 

 
The city was in a panic. The alarm aroused by the recent atrocious crime and

by Otho's well-known proclivities was further increased by the fresh news

about Vitellius. This news had been suppressed before Galba's murder, and it

was believed that only the army of Upper Germany had revolted. Now when

they  saw  that  the  two  men  in  the  world  who  were  most  notorious  for

immorality, indolence, and extravagance had been, as it were, appointed by

Providence to ruin the empire, not only the senators and knights who had

some  stake  and  interest  in  the  country,  but  the  masses  as  well,  openly

deplored  their  fate.  Their  talk  was  no  longer  of  the  horrors  of  the  recent

bloody peace: they reverted to the records of the civil wars, the taking and

retaking of Rome by her own troops, the devastation of Italy, the pillage of

the provinces, the battles of Pharsalia, Philippi, Perusia, and Mutina, those

bywords  of  national  disaster.  'The  world  was  turned  upside  down,'  they

mused, 'even when good men fought for the throne: yet the Roman Empire

survived  the  victories  of  Julius  Caesar  and  of  Augustus,  as  the  Republic

would have survived had Pompey and Brutus been victorious. But now—are

we to go and pray for Otho or for Vitellius? To pray for either would be

impious. It would be wicked to offer vows for the success of either in a war

of which we can only be sure that the winner will prove the worse.' Some

cherished hopes of Vespasian and the armies of the East: he was preferable to

either of the others; still they shuddered at the thought of a fresh war and

fresh bloodshed. Besides, Vespasian's reputation was doubtful. He was the

first emperor who ever changed for the better.

 
I must now explain the origin and causes of the rising of Vitellius. After the

slaughter of Julius Vindex and his whole force, the troops were in high spirits

at the fame and booty they had acquired. Without toil or danger they had won

a most profitable victory. So they were all for marching against the enemy:

plunder seemed better than pay. They had endured a long and unprofitable

service, rendered the more irksome by the country and climate and by the

strict discipline observed. But discipline, however stern in time of peace, is

always  relaxed  in  civil  wars,  when  temptation  stands  on  either  hand  andtreachery goes unpunished. Men, armour, and horses they had in abundance

for use and for show. But, whereas before the war the soldiers only knew the

men of their own company or troop, and the provincial frontier separated the

armies, now, having once joined forces against Vindex, they had gained a

knowledge  of  their  own  strength  and  the  state  of  the  province,  and  were

looking  for  more  fighting  and  fresh  quarrels,  calling  the  Gauls  no  longer

allies, as before, but 'our enemies' or 'the vanquished'. They had also the

support of the Gallic tribes on the banks of the Rhine, who had espoused their

cause and were now the most eager to rouse them against 'the Galbians' as

they now called them, despising the name of Vindex. So, cherishing hostility

against  the  Sequani  and  Aedui,  and  against  all  the  other  communities  in

proportion  to  their  wealth,  they  drank  in  dreams  of  sacking  towns  and

pillaging fields and looting houses, inspired partly by the peculiar failings of

the strong, greed and vanity, and partly also by a feeling of irritation at the

insolence of the Gauls, who boasted, to the chagrin of the army, that Galba

had remitted a quarter of their tribute and given the franchise and grants of

land to their community. Further fuel was added by a rumour, cunningly

circulated and rashly credited, that there was a project on foot to decimate the

legions and discharge all the most enterprising centurions. From every side

came  alarming  news  and  sinister  reports  from  the  city.  The  colony  of

Lugdunum was up in arms, and its stubborn attachment to Nero made it a

hotbed  of  rumour.  But  in  the  camp  itself  the  passions  and  fears  of  the

soldiers,  and,  when  once  they  had  realized  their  strength,  their  feeling  of

security, furnished the richest material for lies and won them easy credence.

 
In  the  preceding  year,  shortly  after  the  beginning  of  December,  Aulus

Vitellius  had  entered  the  province  of  Lower  Germany  and  held  a  careful

inspection of the winter quarters of the legions. He restored many to their

rank,  remitted  degrading  penalties,  and  relieved  those  who  had  suffered

disgrace, acting mainly from ambitious motives, but partly also upon sound

judgement. Amongst other things he showed impartiality in remedying the

injustices due to the mean and dishonest way in which Fonteius Capito had

issued  promotions  and  reductions.  The  soldiers  did  not  judge  Vitellius'

actions as those of a mere ex-consul: they took him for something more, and,

while  serious  critics  found  him  undignified,  his  supporters  spoke  of  his

affability  and  beneficence,  because  he  showed  neither  moderation  nor

judgement in making presents out of his own money and squandering otherpeople's. Besides, they were so greedy for power that they took even his vices

for virtues. In both armies there were plenty of quiet, law-abiding men as

well as many who were unprincipled and disorderly. But for sheer reckless

cupidity none could match two of the legionary legates, Alienus Caecina and

Fabius  Valens.  Valens  was  hostile  to  Galba,  because,  after  unmasking

Verginius's hesitation and thwarting Capito's designs, he considered that he

had been treated with ingratitude: so he incited Vitellius by pointing out to

him the enthusiasm of the troops. 'You,' he would say to him, 'are famous

everywhere, and you need find no obstacle in Hordeonius Flaccus. Britain

will join and the German auxiliaries will flock to your standard. Galba cannot

trust the provinces; the poor old man holds the empire on sufferance; the

transfer can be soon effected, if only you will clap on full sail and meet your

good fortune half-way. Verginius was quite right to hesitate. He came of a

family of knights, and his father was a nobody. He would have failed, had he

accepted the empire: his refusal saved him. Your father was thrice consul,

and he was censor with an emperor for his colleague. That gives you imperial

dignity to start with, and makes it unsafe for you to remain a private citizen.'

These promptings stirred Vitellius' sluggish nature to form desires, but hardly

hopes.

 
Caecina,  on  the  other  hand,  in  Upper  Germany,  was  a  handsome  youth,

whose big build, imperious spirit, clever tongue, and upright carriage had

completely won the hearts of the soldiers. While quaestor in Baetica he had

promptly  joined  Galba's  party,  and  in  spite  of  his  youth  had  been  given

command  of  a  legion.  Later  he  was  convicted  of  misappropriating  public

funds, and, on Galba's orders, prosecuted for peculation. Highly indignant,

Caecina determined to embroil the world and bury his own disgrace in the

ruins of his country. Nor were the seeds of dissension lacking in the army.

The entire force had taken part in the war against Vindex, nor was it until

after Nero's death that they joined Galba's side, and even then they had been

forestalled in swearing allegiance by the detachments of Lower Germany.

Then again the Treviri and Lingones and the other communities which Galba

had punished by issuing harsh edicts and confiscating part of their territory,

were in close communication with the winter quarters of the legions. They

began to talk treason: the soldiers degenerated in civilian society: it only

wanted some one to avail himself of the offer they had made to Verginius.

Following an ancient custom, the tribe of the Lingones had made a present ofa pair of silver hands to the legions as a symbol of hospitality. Assuming an

appearance of squalid misery, their envoys made the round of the officers'

quarters and the soldiers' tents complaining of their own wrongs and of the

rewards lavished on neighbouring tribes. Finding the soldiers ready to listen,

they  made  inflammatory  allusions  to  the  army  itself,  its  dangers  and

humiliation. Mutiny was almost ripe, when Hordeonius Flaccus ordered the

envoys to withdraw, and, in order to secure the secrecy of their departure,

gave instructions to them to leave the camp by night. This gave rise to an

alarming rumour. Many declared that the envoys had been killed, and that, if

they did not look out for themselves, the leading spirits among the soldiers,

who had complained of the present state of things, would be murdered in the

dark, while their comrades knew nothing about it. So the legions formed a

secret compact. The auxiliaries were also taken into the plot, although at first

they had been distrusted, because their infantry and cavalry had been posted

in camp all round the legion's quarters as though an attack on them were

meditated. However, they soon showed themselves the keener conspirators.

Disloyalty is a better bond for war than it ever proves in peace.

 
In Lower Germany, however, the legions on the first of January swore the

usual oath of allegiance to Galba, though with much hesitation. Few voices

were heard even in the front ranks; the rest were silent, each waiting for his

neighbour to take some bold step. Human nature is always ready to follow

where it hates to lead. However, the feelings of the legions varied. The First

and Fifth were already mutinous enough to throw a few stones at Galba's

statue.  The  Fifteenth  and  Sixteenth  dared  not  venture  beyond  muttered

threats, but they were watching to see the outbreak begin. In Upper Germany,

on the other hand, on the very same day, the Fourth and the Twenty-second

legions,  who  were  quartered  together,  smashed  their  statues  of  Galba  to

atoms. The Fourth took the lead, the Twenty-second at first holding back, but

eventually  making  common  cause  with  them.  They  did  not  want  it  to  be

thought that they were shaking off their allegiance to the empire, so in taking

the oath they invoked the long obsolete names of the Senate and People of

Rome. None of the officers made any movement for Galba, and indeed some

of  them,  as  happens  in  such  outbreaks,  headed  the  rebellion.  However,

nobody made any kind of set speech or mounted the platform, for there was

no one as yet with whom to curry favour.

 
The ex-consul Hordeonius Flaccus stood by and watched their treachery. Hehad not the courage to check the storm or even to rally the waverers and

encourage the faithful. Sluggish and cowardly, it was mere indolence that

kept  him  loyal.  Four  centurions  of  the  Twenty-second  legion,  Nonius

Receptus, Donatius Valens, Romilius Marcellus, and Calpurnius Repentinus,

who tried to protect Galba's statues, were swept away by the rush of the

soldiers and put under arrest. No one retained any respect for their former

oath of allegiance, or even remembered it; and, as happens in mutinies, they

were all on the side of the majority. On the night of the first of January a

standard-bearer of the Fourth legion came to Cologne, and brought the news

to Vitellius at his dinner that the

 
Fourth  and  Twenty-second  legions  had  broken  down  Galba's  statues  and

sworn  allegiance  to  the  Senate  and  People  of  Rome.  As  this  oath  was

meaningless, it seemed best to seize the critical moment and offer them an

emperor.  Vitellius  dispatched  messengers  to  inform  his  own  troops  and

generals that the army of the Upper Province had revolted from Galba; so

they must either make war on the rebels immediately, or, if they preferred

peace and unity, make an emperor for themselves; and there was less danger,

he reminded them, in choosing an emperor than in looking for one.

 
The quarters of the First legion were nearest at hand, and Fabius Valens was

the  most  enterprising  of  the  generals.  On  the  following  day  he  entered

Cologne with the cavalry of his legion and auxiliaries, and saluted Vitellius

as emperor. The other legions of the province followed suit, vying with each

other in enthusiasm; and the army of the Upper Province, dropping the fine-

sounding titles of the Senate and People of Rome, joined Vitellius on the

third of January, which clearly showed that on the two previous days they

were not really at the disposal of a republican government. The inhabitants of

Cologne and the Treviri and Lingones, rivalling the zeal of the troops, made

offers of assistance, or of horses or arms or money, each according to the

measure of their strength, wealth, or enterprise. And these offers came not

only from the civil and military authorities, men who had plenty of money to

spare and much to hope from victory, but whole companies or individual

soldiers handed over their savings, or, instead of money, their belts, or the

silver  ornaments  on  their  uniforms,  some  carried  away  by  a  wave  of

enthusiasm, some acting from motives of self-interest.

 
Vitellius  accordingly  commended  the  zeal  of  the  troops.  He  distributedamong  Roman  knights  the  court-offices  which  had  been  usually  held  by

freedmen, paid the centurions their furlough-fees out of the imperial purse,

and  for  the  most  part  conceded  the  soldiers'  savage  demands  for  one

execution after another, though he occasionally cheated them by pretending

to imprison their victims. Thus Pompeius Propinquus, the imperial agent in

Belgica, was promptly executed, while Julius Burdo, who commanded the

fleet on the Rhine, was adroitly rescued. The indignation of the army had

broken out against him, because he was supposed to have intrigued against

Fonteius Capito, and to have accused him falsely. Capito's memory was dear

to the army, and when violence reigns murder may show its face, but pardon

must be stealthy. So Burdo was kept in confinement and only released after

victory  had  allayed  the  soldiers'  rancour.  Meanwhile  a  centurion,  named

Crispinus, was offered as a scape-goat. He had actually stained his hands

with  Capito's  blood,  so  his  guilt  seemed  more  obvious  to  those  who

clamoured for his punishment, and Vitellius felt he was a cheaper sacrifice.

 
Julius Civilis was the next to be rescued from danger. He was all-powerful

among the Batavi, and Vitellius did not want to alienate so spirited a people

by punishing him. Besides, eight cohorts of Batavian troops were stationed

among  the  Lingones.  They  had  been  an  auxiliary  force  attached  to  the

Fourteenth,  and  in  the  general  disturbance  had  deserted  the  legion.  Their

decision for one side or the other would be of the first importance. Nonius,

Donatius, Romilius, and Calpurnius, the centurions mentioned above, were

executed by order of Vitellius. They had been convicted of loyalty, a heinous

offence among deserters. His party soon gained the accession of Valerius

Asiaticus, governor of Belgica, who subsequently married Vitellius' daughter,

and of Junius Blaesus, governor of the Lyons division of Gaul, who brought

with  him  the  Italian  legion  and  a  regiment  of  cavalry  known  as  'Taurus'

Horse', which had been quartered at Lugdunum. The forces in Raetia lost no

time  in  joining  his  standard,  and  even  the  troops  in  Britain  showed  no

hesitation.

 
Trebellius Maximus, the governor of Britain, had earned by his meanness and

cupidity the contempt and hatred of the army, which was further inflamed by

the action of his old enemy Roscius Coelius, who commanded the Twentieth

legion, and they now seized the opportunity of the civil war to break out into

a  fierce  quarrel.  Trebellius  blamed  Coelius  for  the  mutinous  temper  and

insubordination of the army: Coelius complained that Trebellius had robbedhis  men  and  impaired  their  efficiency.  Meanwhile  their  unseemly  quarrel

ruined the discipline of the forces, whose insubordination soon came to a

head. The auxiliary horse and foot joined in the attacks on the governor, and

rallied round Coelius. Trebellius, thus hunted out and abandoned, took refuge

with Vitellius. The province remained quiet, despite the removal of the ex-

consul. The government was carried on by the commanding officers of the

legions, who were equal in authority, though Coelius' audacity gave him an

advantage over the rest.

 
Thus  reinforced  by  the  army  from  Britain,  Vitellius,  who  now  had  an

immense force and vast resources at his disposal, decided on an invasion by

two routes under two separate generals. Fabius Valens was to lure the Gauls

to his standard, or, if they refused, to devastate their country, and then invade

Italy by way of the Cottian Alps. Caecina was to follow the shorter route and

descend into Italy over the Pennine Pass. Valens' column comprised the Fifth

legion with its 'eagle', and some picked detachments from the army of Lower

Germany, together with auxiliary horse and foot, amounting in all to 40,000

men. Caecina's troops from Upper Germany numbered 30,000, their main

strength consisting in the Twenty-first legion. Both columns were reinforced

by German auxiliaries, whom Vitellius also recruited to fill up his own army,

intending to follow with the main force of the attack.

 
Strange was the contrast between Vitellius and his army. The soldiers were

all eagerness, clamouring for battle at once, while Gaul was still frightened

and Spain still undecided. Winter was no obstacle to them; peace and delay

were for cowards: they must invade Italy and seize Rome: haste was the

safest course in civil war, where action is better than deliberation. Vitellius

was dully apathetic, anticipating his high station by indulging in idle luxury

and lavish entertainments. At midday he would be drunk and drowsy with

over-eating. However, such was the zeal of the soldiers that they even did the

general's duties, and behaved exactly as if he had been present to encourage

the  alert  and  threaten  the  laggards.  They  promptly  fell  in  and  began  to

clamour for the signal to start. The title of Germanicus was then and there

conferred  on  Vitellius:  Caesar  he  would  never  be  called,  even  after  his

victory.

 
 

                           The March of Valens' Column

 
 

 
On the very day of departure a happy omen greeted Fabius Valens and the

army under his command. As the column advanced, an eagle flew steadily

ahead and seemed to lead the way. Loudly though the soldiers cheered, hour

after  hour  the  bird  flew  undismayed,  and  was  taken  for  a  sure  omen  of

success.

 
They passed peaceably through the country of the Treviri, who were allies.

At  Divodurum,  the  chief  town  of  the  Mediomatrici,  although  they  were

welcomed  with  all  courtesy,  the  troops  fell  into  a  sudden  panic.  Hastily

seizing their arms, they began to massacre the innocent citizens. Their object

was not plunder. They were seized by a mad frenzy, which was the harder to

allay as its cause was a mystery. Eventually the general's entreaties prevailed,

and they refrained from destroying the town. However, nearly 4,000 men had

already been killed. This spread such alarm throughout Gaul, that, as the

army approached, whole towns flocked out with their magistrates at their

head and prayers for mercy in their mouths. Women and boys prostrated

themselves along the roads, and they resorted to every possible means by

which an enemy's anger may be appeased, petitioning for peace, though war

there was none.

 
It was in the country of the Leuci that Valens heard the news of Galba's

murder and Otho's elevation. The soldiers showed no emotion, neither joy nor

fear: their thoughts were all for war. The Gauls' doubts were now decided.

They hated Otho and Vitellius equally, but Vitellius they also feared. They

next  reached  the  Lingones,  faithful  adherents  of  their  party.  There  the

courtesy  of  the  citizens  was  only  equalled  by  the  good  behaviour  of  the

troops. But this did not last for long, thanks to the disorderly conduct of the

Batavian auxiliaries, who, as narrated above, had detached themselves from

the  Fourteenth  legion  and  been  drafted  into  Valens'  column.  A  quarrel

between  some  Batavians  and  legionaries  led  to  blows:  the  other  soldiers

quickly took sides, and a fierce battle would have ensued, had not Valens

punished a few of the Batavians to remind them of the discipline they seemed

to have forgotten.

 
Coming to the Aedui, they in vain sought an excuse for fighting. For whenthe  natives  were  ordered  to  contribute  money  and  arms,  they  brought  a

gratuitous  present  of  provisions  as  well.  Lugdunum  did  gladly  what  the

Aedui had done from fear. But the town was deprived of the Italian legion

and Taurus' Horse. Valens decided to leave the Eighteenth cohort there in its

old winter quarters as a garrison. Manlius Valens, who was in command of

the Italian legion, never received any distinction from Vitellius, although he

deserved well of the party, the reason being that Fabius slandered him behind

his back, while to avert his suspicions he praised him to his face.

 
The  recent  war  had  served  to  inflame  the  long-standing  quarrel  between

Lugdunum  and  Vienne.  Much  damage  was  done  on  both  sides,  and  the

frequency and animosity of their conflicts proved that they were not merely

fighting for Nero and Galba. Galba had made his displeasure an excuse for

confiscating to the Treasury the revenues of Lugdunum, while on Vienne he

had conferred various distinctions. The result was a bitter rivalry between the

towns,  and  the  Rhone  between  them  only  formed  a  bond  of  hatred.

Consequently the inhabitants of Lugdunum began to work on the feelings of

individual Roman soldiers, and to urge them to crush Vienne. They reminded

them how the Viennese had laid siege to Lugdunum, a Roman colony, had

assisted the efforts of Vindex, and had lately raised troops to defend Galba.

Having supplied a pretext for bad feeling, they went on to point out the rich

opportunity for plunder. Not content with private persuasion, they presented a

formal petition that the army would march to avenge them, and destroy the

head-quarters  of  the  Gallic  war.  Vienne,  they  urged,  was  thoroughly  un-

Roman and hostile, while Lugdunum was a Roman colony, contributing men

to the army and sharing in its victories and reverses. They besought them in

the event of adverse fortune not to leave their city to the fury of its enemies.

 
By these arguments and others of the same nature they brought matters to

such a pass, that even the generals and party leaders despaired of cooling the

army's indignation. However, the Viennese realized their danger. Arrayed in

veils and fillets, they met the approaching column and, seizing their hands

and knees and the soles of their feet in supplication, succeeded in appeasing

the  troops.  Valens  made  each  of  the  soldiers  a  present  of  three  hundred

sesterces.  They  were  thus  persuaded  to  respect  the  antiquity  and  high

standing of the colony, and to listen with patience to their general's speech, in

which  he  commended  to  them  the  lives  and  property  of  the  Viennese.

However, the town was disarmed, and private individuals had to assist thearmy  with  various  kinds  of  provisions.  There  was,  however,  a  persistent

rumour that Valens himself had been bought with a heavy bribe. He had long

been in mean circumstances and ill concealed his sudden accession of wealth.

Prolonged poverty had whetted his inordinate desires, and the needy youth

grew into an extravagant old man.

 
He next led the army by slow stages through the country of the Allobroges

and  Vocontii,  bribes  to  the  general  determining  the  length  of  each  day's

march and the choice of a camp. For Valens struck disgraceful bargains with

the landowners and municipal authorities, often applying violent threats, as,

for instance, at Lucus, a township of the Vocontii, which he threatened to

burn, until he was appeased with money. Where it was impossible to get

money, he was mollified by appeals to his lust. And so it went on until the

Alps were reached.

 
 

 
                        The March of Caecina's Column

 
 

 
There  was  even  more  looting  and  bloodshed  on  Caecina's  march.  The

Helvetii, a Gallic tribe once famous as fighting men and still distinguished by

the memory of their past, having heard nothing of Galba's murder, refused to

acknowledge  the  authority  of  Vitellius.  This  exasperated  Caecina's

headstrong nature. Hostilities broke out owing to the greed and impatience of

the Twenty-first legion, who had seized a sum of money which was being

sent to pay the garrison of a fort in which the Helvetii used to keep native

troops  at  their  own  expense.  The  Helvetii,  highly  indignant  at  this,

intercepted a dispatch from the German army to the Pannonian legions, and

kept  a  centurion  and  some  men  in  custody.  Greedy  for  battle,  Caecina

hastened to take immediate vengeance without giving them time for second

thoughts. Promptly breaking up his camp, he proceeded to harry the country,

and  sacked  a  charming  and  much-frequented  watering-place,  which  had

grown  during  the  long  peace  into  the  size  and  importance  of  a  town.

Instructions were sent to the Raetian auxiliaries to attack the Helvetii in the

rear, while their attention was occupied with the legion.

 
Full of spirit beforehand, the Helvetii were terrified in the face of danger. Atthe  first  alarm  they  had  chosen  Claudius  Severus  general,  but  they  knew

nothing of fighting or discipline and were incapable of combined action. An

engagement with the Roman veterans would be disastrous; and the walls,

dilapidated by time, could not stand a siege. They found themselves between

Caecina and his powerful army on the one side, and on the other the Raetian

auxiliaries, both horse and foot, and the whole fighting force of Raetia as

well, trained soldiers well used to fighting. Their country was given over to

plunder and massacre. Flinging away their arms, they wandered miserably

between two fires. Wounded and scattered, most of them took refuge on the

Bötzberg.  But  some  Thracian  auxiliaries  were  promptly  sent  to  dislodge

them. The German army, aided by the Raetians, pursued them through the

woods, and cut them to pieces in their hiding-places. Many thousands were

killed and many sold as slaves. Having completed the work of destruction,

the army advanced in hostile array against Aventicum, their capital town, and

were  met  by  envoys  offering  surrender.  The  offer  was  accepted.  Caecina

executed Julius Alpinus, one of their chief men, as the prime instigator of the

revolt. The rest he left to experience the clemency or cruelty of Vitellius.

 
It is hard to say whether these envoys found Vitellius or the army the more

implacable.  The  soldiers  clamoured  for  the  destruction  of  the  town,  and

shook their fists and weapons in the envoys' faces: even Vitellius indulged in

threatening  language.  Ultimately,  however,  Claudius  Cossus,  one  of  the

envoys, a noted speaker who greatly enhanced the effect of his eloquence by

concealing his skill under a well-timed affectation of nervousness, succeeded

in  softening  the  hearts  of  the  soldiers.  A  mob  is  always  liable  to  sudden

changes of feeling, and the men were as sensible to pity as they had been

extravagant in their brutality. Thus with streams of tears and importunate

prayers for a better answer the envoys procured a free pardon for Aventicum.

 
Caecina halted for a few days in Helvetian territory until he could get news of

Vitellius' decision. Meantime, while carrying on his preparations for crossing

the Alps, he received from Italy the joyful news that 'Silius' Horse', stationed

at Padua, had come over to Vitellius. The members of this troop had served

under  Vitellius  when  pro-consul  in  Africa.  They  had  subsequently  been

detached under orders from Nero to precede him to Egypt, and had then been

recalled, owing to the outbreak of the war with Vindex. They were now in

Italy.  Their  officers,  who  knew  nothing  of  Otho  and  were  attached  to

Vitellius, extolled the strength of the approaching column and the fame of theGerman  army.  So  the  troop  went  over  to  Vitellius,  bringing  their  new

emperor a gift of the four strongest towns of the Transpadane district, Milan,

Novara, Eporedia, and Vercelli. Of this they informed Caecina themselves.

But one troop of horse could not garrison the whole of the widest part of

Italy. Caecina accordingly hurried forward the Gallic, Lusitanian, and British

auxiliaries,  and  some  German  detachments,  together  with  'Petra's  Horse',

while he himself hesitated whether he should not cross the Raetian Alps into

Noricum and attack the governor, Petronius Urbicus, who, having raised a

force  of  irregulars  and  broken  down  the  bridges,  was  supposed  to  be  a

faithful adherent of Otho. However, he was afraid of losing the auxiliaries

whom he had sent on ahead, and at the same time he considered that there

was more glory in holding Italy, and that, wherever the theatre of the war

might be, Noricum was sure to be among the spoils of victory. So he chose

the Pennine route and led his legionaries and the heavy marching column

across the Alps, although they were still deep in snow.

 
 

 
            Otho's Government and the Distribution of Forces

 
 

 
Meanwhile, contrary to all expectation, Otho was no prey to idle luxury. He

postponed  his  pleasures  and  disguised  his  extravagance,  suiting  all  his

behaviour to the dignity of his position. But people knew they had not seen

the last of his vices, and his virtuous hypocrisy only increased their alarm. He

gave orders to summon Marius Celsus to the Capitol. This was the consul-

elect  whom  he  had  rescued  from  the  savage  clutches  of  the  soldiers  by

pretending  to  put  him  in  prison.  Otho  now  wanted  to  earn  a  name  for

clemency by pardoning a well-known man, who had fought against his party.

Celsus was firm. Pleading guilty to the charge of fidelity to Galba, he went

on to show that he had set an example which was all to Otho's advantage.

Otho treated him as if there was nothing to pardon. Calling on heaven to

witness their reconciliation, he then and there admitted him to the circle of his

intimate friends, and subsequently gave him an appointment as one of his

generals.  Celsus  remained  faithful  to  Otho  too,  doomed  apparently  to  the

losing side. His acquittal, which delighted the upper classes and was popular

with the mass of the people, even earned the approval of the soldiers, whonow admired the qualities which had previously aroused their indignation.

 
Equal rejoicing, though for different reasons, followed the long-looked-for

downfall of Ofonius Tigellinus. Born of obscure parentage, he had grown

from an immoral youth into a vicious old man. He rose to the command first

of the Police, and then of the Praetorian Guards, finding that vice was a short

cut to such rewards of virtue. In these and other high offices he developed the

vices of maturity, first cruelty, then greed. He corrupted Nero and introduced

him to every kind of depravity; then ventured on some villainies behind his

back, and finally deserted and betrayed him. Thus in his case, as in no other,

those who hated Nero and those who wished him back agreed, though from

different motives, in calling loudly for his execution. During Galba's reign he

had been protected by the influence of Titus Vinius, on the plea that he had

saved his daughter. Saved her he had, not from any feelings of pity (he had

killed too many for that), but to secure a refuge for the future. For all such

rascals,  distrusting  the  present  and  fearing  a  change  of  fortune,  always

prepare for themselves a shelter against public indignation by obtaining the

favour of private persons. So they rely to escape punishment not on their

innocence but on a system of mutual insurance. People were all the more

incensed against Tigellinus, since the recent feeling against Vinius was added

to their old hatred for him. From all quarters of Rome they flocked to the

palace and the squares; and above all, in the circus and the theatre, where the

mob enjoys complete licence, they assembled in crowds and broke out into

riotous uproar. Eventually Tigellinus at Sinuessa Spa received the news that

his last hour was inevitably come. There after a cowardly delay in the foul

embraces of his prostitutes he cut his throat with a razor, and blackened the

infamy of his life by a hesitating and shameful death.

 
About the same time there arose a demand for the punishment of Calvia

Crispinilla.  But  she  was  saved  by  various  prevarications,  and  Otho's

connivence cost him some discredit. This woman had tutored Nero in vice,

and afterwards crossed to Africa to incite Clodius Macer to civil war. While

there she openly schemed to start a famine in Rome. However, she secured

herself by marrying an ex-consul, and lived to enjoy a wide popularity in

Rome. She escaped harm under Galba, Otho, and Vitellius, and eventually

wielded  a  great  influence  due  to  her  being  both  rich  and  childless,

considerations of the first importance in any state of society.

 During  this  time  Otho  wrote  constantly  to  Vitellius,  holding  out  various

effeminate  inducements,  making  him  offers  of  money  or  an  influential

position, or any retreat he liked to select for a life of luxury. Vitellius made

similar offers. At first both wrote in the mildest tone, though the affectation

on  either  side  was  stupid  and  inappropriate.  But  they  soon  struck  a

quarrelsome note, and reproached each other with immorality and crime, both

with a good deal of truth. Otho recalled the commission which Galba had

sent out to Germany, and, using the pretext of senatorial authority, sent fresh

commissioners to both the armies in Germany, and also to the Italian legion,

and  the  troops  quartered  at  Lugdunum.  However,  the  commissioners

remained with Vitellius with a readiness which showed they were under no

compulsion; and the guards who had been attached to them, ostensibly as a

mark of honour, were sent back at once before they had time to mix with the

legionary soldiers. Further than this, Fabius Valens sent letters in the name of

the German army to the Guards and the City Garrison, extolling the strength

of his own side and offering to join forces. He even went so far as to reproach

them with having transferred to Otho the title which had long before been

conferred on Vitellius.

 
Thus they were assailed with threats as well as promises, and told that they

were not strong enough to fight, and had nothing to lose by making peace.

But, in spite of all, the fidelity of the Guards remained unchanged. However,

Otho dispatched assassins to Germany, Vitellius to Rome. Neither met with

success. Vitellius' assassins were lost in the crowds of Rome, where nobody

knows anybody, and thus escaped detection: Otho's were betrayed by their

strange faces, since the troops all knew each other by sight. Vitellius then

composed a letter to Otho's brother Titianus, threatening that his life and his

son's should answer for the safety of Vitellius' mother and children. As it

happened neither household suffered. Fear was perhaps the reason in Otho's

time,  but  Vitellius,  after  his  victory,  could  certainly  claim  credit  for

clemency.

 
The  first  news  which  gave  Otho  any  degree  of  confidence  was  the

announcement from Illyricum that the legions of Dalmatia and Pannonia and

Moesia had sworn allegiance to him. Similar news arrived from Spain, and

Cluvius Rufus was commended in a special decree, but it was found out

immediately afterwards that Spain had gone over to Vitellius. Even Aquitania

soon fell away, although Julius Cordus had sworn in the province for Otho.Loyalty and affection seemed dead: men changed from one side to the other

under the stress of fear or compulsion. It was fear which gave Vitellius the

Province of Narbonese Gaul, for it is easy to go over when the big battalions

are so near. The distant provinces and the troops across the sea all remained

at Otho's disposal, but not from any enthusiasm for his cause; what weighed

with them was the name of Rome and the title of the senate. Besides, Otho

had got the first hearing. Vespasian swore in the Jewish army for Otho, and

Mucianus the legions in Syria; Egypt too and all the provinces towards the

East were held for him. He also received the submission of Africa, where

Carthage had taken the lead, without waiting for the sanction of the governor,

Vipstanus Apronianus. Crescens, one of Nero's freedmen—in evil days these

creatures play a part in politics —had given the common people of the town a

gala dinner in honour of the new emperor, with the result that the inhabitants

hurried into various excesses. The other African communities followed the

example of Carthage.

 
The provinces and their armies being thus divided, Vitellius could only win

the throne by fighting. Otho meanwhile was carrying on the government as if

the time were one of profound peace. Sometimes he consulted the country's

dignity, though more often the exigencies of the moment forced him into

unseemly haste. He held the consulship himself with his brother Titianus as

colleague until the first of March. For the next two months he appointed

Verginius, as a sort of sop to the army in Germany. As colleague he gave him

Pompeius Vopiscus, ostensibly because he was an old friend of his own, but

it was generally understood as a compliment to Vienne. For the rest of the

year the appointments which Nero or Galba had made were allowed to stand.

The brothers Caelius and Flavius Sabinus were consuls for June and July,

Arrius  Antoninus  and  Marius  Celsus  for  August  and  September;  even

Vitellius after his victory did not cancel their appointment. To the pontifical

and augural colleges Otho either nominated old ex-magistrates, as the final

crown of their career, or else, when young aristocrats returned from exile, he

instated  them  by  way  of  recompense  in  the  pontifical  posts  which  their

fathers or grandfathers had held. He restored Cadius Rufus, Pedius Blaesus,

and Saevinus Proculus to their seats in the senate. They had been convicted

during Claudius' and Nero's reigns of extortion in the provinces. In pardoning

them the name of their offence was changed, and their greed appeared as

'treason'. For so unpopular was the law of treason that it sapped the force ofbetter statutes.

 
Otho next tried to win over the municipalities and provincial towns by similar

bribes. At the colonies of Hispalis and Emerita he enrolled new families of

settlers, granted the franchise to the whole community of the Lingones, and

made  over  certain  Moorish  towns  as  a  gift  to  the  province  of  Baetica.

Cappadocia and Africa were also granted new privileges, as showy as they

were  short-lived.  All  these  grants  are  excused  by  the  exigences  of  the

moment and the impending crisis, but he even found time to remember his

old  amours  and  passed  a  measure  through  the  senate  restoring  Poppaea's

statues. He is believed also to have thought of celebrating Nero's memory as

a means of attracting public sympathy. Some persons actually erected statues

of Nero, and there were times when the populace and the soldiers, by way of

enhancing  his  fame  and  dignity,  saluted  him  as  Nero  Otho.  However,  he

refused to commit himself. He was ashamed to accept the title, yet afraid to

forbid its use.

 
While the whole of Rome was intent upon the civil war, foreign affairs were

neglected. Consequently a Sarmatian tribe called the Rhoxolani, who had cut

up two cohorts of auxiliaries in the previous winter, now formed the still

more  daring  scheme  of  invading  Moesia.  Inspirited  by  success,  they

assembled nearly 9,000 mounted men, all more intent on plunder than on

fighting. While they were riding about aimlessly without any suspicion of

danger,  they  were  suddenly  attacked  by  the  Third  legion  and  its  native

auxiliaries.  On  the  Roman  side  everything  was  ready  for  a  battle:  the

Sarmatians were scattered over the country; some in their greed for plunder

were heavily laden, and their horses could scarcely move on the slippery

roads. They were caught in a trap and cut to pieces. It is quite extraordinary

how all a Sarmatian's courage is, so to speak, outside himself. Fighting on

foot, no one is more cowardly; but their cavalry charge would break almost

any troops. On this occasion it was raining and the ground was greasy with

thaw; their pikes and their long swords, needing both hands to wield, were

useless; their horses slipped and they were encumbered by the heavy coat of

mail which all their chiefs and nobles wear. Being made of iron plates and a

very hard kind of leather, it is impenetrable to blows, but most inconvenient

for any one who is knocked down by a charge of the enemy and tries to get

up. Besides, they sank into the deep, soft snow. The Roman soldiers in their

neat leather jerkins, armed with javelin and lance, and using, if need be, theirlight swords, sprang on the unarmed Sarmatians (they never carry shields)

and  stabbed  them  at  close  quarters.  A  few,  surviving  the  battle,  hid

themselves in the marshes, and there perished miserably from the severity of

the winter and their wounds. When the news of this reached Rome, Marcus

Aponius, the governor of Moesia, was granted a triumphal statue, while the

commanding officers of the legions, Fulvius Aurelius, Tettius Julianus, and

Numisius Lupus, received the insignia of consular rank. Otho was delighted

and took all the credit to himself, as if he had been the successful general, and

had himself employed his officers and armies to enlarge the empire.

 
In the meantime a riot broke out in an unexpected quarter, and, though trivial

at first, nearly ended in the destruction of Rome. Otho had given orders that

the Seventeenth cohort should be summoned from the colony of Ostia to the

city, and Varius Crispinus, a tribune of the guards, was instructed to provide

them with arms. Anxious to carry out his instructions undisturbed while the

camp  was  quiet,  he  arranged  that  the  arsenal  was  to  be  opened  and  the

cohort's  wagons  loaded  after  nightfall.  The  hour  aroused  suspicion;  the

motive was questioned; his choice of a quiet moment resulted in an uproar.

The mere sight of swords made the drunken soldiers long to use them. They

began to murmur and accuse their officers of treachery, suggesting that the

senators' slaves were going to be armed against Otho. Some of them were too

fuddled to know what they were saying: the rascals saw a chance of plunder:

the mass of them, as usual, were simply eager for a change: and such as were

loyal could not carry out their orders in the darkness. When Crispinus tried to

check them, the mutineers killed him together with the most determined of

the centurions, seized their armour, bared their swords, and mounting the

horses, made off at full speed for Rome and the palace.

 
It so happened that a large party of Roman senators and their wives was

dining with Otho. In their alarm they wondered whether the soldiers' outbreak

was unpremeditated or a ruse of the emperor's: would it be safer to fly in all

directions or to stay and be arrested? At one moment they would make a

show of firmness, at the next their terror betrayed them. All the time they

were watching Otho's face, and, as happens when people suspect each other,

he was just as afraid himself as they were of him. But feeling no less alarm

for the senators than for himself, he promptly dispatched the prefects of the

Guards to appease the anger of the troops, and told all his guests to leave

immediately. Then on all sides Roman officials could be seen to throw awaytheir insignia, avoid their suite, and slink off unattended. Old gentlemen and

their wives roamed the dark streets in all directions. Few went home, most of

them fled to friends, or sought an obscure refuge with the humblest of their

clients.

 
The soldiers' onrush could not be stopped at the gates of the palace. They

demanded  to  see  Otho  and  invaded  the  banquet-hall.  Julius  Martialis,  a

tribune  of  the  Guards,  and  Vitellius  Saturninus,  the  camp-prefect  of  the

legion, were wounded while endeavouring to bar their progress. On every

side they brandished swords and hurled threats, now against their officers,

now against the whole senate; and since they could not select any one victim

for their wrath, in a blind frenzy of panic they clamoured for a free hand

against all the senators. At last Otho, sacrificing his dignity, stood up on a

couch and with great difficulty restrained them by means of prayers and tears.

They returned to their camp unwillingly, and with a guilty conscience.

 
The next day Rome was like a captured city. The houses were all shut, the

streets almost deserted, and everybody looked depressed. The soldiers, too,

hung their heads, though they were more sulky than sorry for what they had

done. Their prefects, Licinius Proculus and Plotius Firmus, harangued them

by  companies,  the  one  mildly,  the  other  harshly,  for  they  were  men  of

different natures. They concluded by announcing that the men were to receive

five thousand sesterces apiece. After that Otho ventured to enter the camp.

The  tribunes  and  centurions  each  flinging  away  the  insignia  of  his  rank,

crowded round him begging for a safe discharge. Stung by the disgrace of

this, the troops soon quieted down, and even went the length of demanding

that the ringleaders should be punished.

 
In the general disturbance Otho's position was difficult. The soldiers were by

no  means  unanimous.  The  better  sort  wanted  him  to  put  a  stop  to  the

prevalent insubordination, but the great bulk of them liked faction-fighting

and emperors who had to court their favour, and with the prospect of rioting

and plunder were ready enough for civil war. He realized, also, that one who

wins a throne by violence cannot keep it by suddenly trying to enforce the

rigid discipline of earlier days. However, the danger of the crisis both for the

city and the senate seriously alarmed him, so he finally delivered himself as

follows:—

 'Fellow soldiers, I have not come to fan the fire of your affection for me, or to

instil courage into your hearts: in both those qualities you are more than rich.

No, I have come to ask you to moderate your courage and to set some bounds

to  your  affection.  These  recent  disturbances  did  not  originate  in  those

passions of greed or violence, which so often cause dissension in an army;

nor was it that you feared some danger and tried to shirk it. The sole cause

was  your  excessive  loyalty,  which  you  displayed  with  more  ardour  than

judgement.  For  with  the  best  of  motives,  indiscretion  often  lands  men  in

disaster. We are preparing for war. Do you imagine that we could publish all

our dispatches, and discuss our plans in the presence of the whole army,

when we have to devise a systematic campaign and keep up with the rapid

changes of the situation? There are things a soldier ought to know, but there

is much of which he must be ignorant. It is necessary for the maintenance of

strict  discipline  and  of  the  general's  authority  that  even  his  tribunes  and

centurions should often obey blindly. If every one is going to inquire into his

motives, discipline is done for, and his authority falls to the ground. Suppose

in actual warfare you are called to arms at dead of night: shall a few drunken

blackguards—for I cannot believe that many lost their heads in the recent

panic—go and stain their hands with their officers' blood, and then break into

the general's tent?

 
'Now I know you did it to protect me, but the riot and the darkness and the

general  confusion  might  easily  have  provided  an  opportunity  to  kill  me.

Suppose Vitellius and his satellites had their choice of the state of mind they

would  pray  to  find  us  in;  what  more  could  they  desire  than  mutiny  and

dissension, the men insubordinate to the centurions, and the centurions to

their superior officers, and the whole force, horse and foot alike, rushing in

headlong confusion to their ruin? Good soldiering, my comrades, consists in

obedience, not in scrutinizing the general's orders; and the army which is

most orderly in peace is most courageous on the field of battle. Yours are the

swords and the courage; you must leave it to me to plan the campaign, and to

direct  your  valour.  The  culprits  were  but  few,  and  only  two  are  to  be

punished; the rest of you must blot out all memory of that discreditable night.

No army must ever hear again such words spoken against the senate. It is the

brain of the empire and the glory of all the provinces. Why, in Heaven's

name, the very Germans themselves, whom Vitellius is stirring up with all his

might against us, would not dare to call its members into question! Shall it besaid  that  Italy's  own  sons,  the  real  soldiery  of  Rome,  are  clamouring  to

murder and massacre the very senators whose lustre it is that throws into the

shade the obscure and vulgar adherents of Vitellius? Vitellius has seized a

few provinces and raised a sort of shadow of an army; but the senate is on our

side. Therefore, Rome is for us; they are against her. Do you imagine that the

stability of this beautiful city consists in houses and edifices built of stone

upon stone? Nay, they are dumb inanimate things that may fall to pieces and

be rebuilt at pleasure. The eternity of our empire, the peace of the world, your

welfare and mine, all depend upon the safety of the senate. Instituted with

solemn ceremony by the father and founder of Rome, the senate has come

down in undying continuity from the kings to the emperors; and as we have

received it from our ancestors, so let us hand it on to our posterity. From your

ranks come the senators, and from the senate come the emperors of Rome.'

 
This speech, as being well calculated to provide a reprimand and a sedative

for the soldiers, and Otho's moderation—for he only ordered the punishment

of two men—were well received. He had calmed for a moment the troops he

could not control. Yet peace and quiet were not restored in Rome. One could

still  detect  the  clash  of  arms  and  the  lurid  face  of  war.  Refraining  from

organized  riot,  the  soldiers  now  dispersed  to  private  houses  and  lived  in

disguise, giving vent to their bad feeling by maligning all whom nobility of

birth  or  wealth  or  any  other  distinction  made  a  mark  for  scandal.  Many,

besides, believed that some of Vitellius' soldiers had come to Rome to study

the state of party feeling. Everywhere suspicion was rife, and terror invaded

even the privacy of the home. But far greater was the alarm displayed in

public places. With every fresh piece of news that rumour brought, men's

feelings and the expression on their faces changed. They were afraid to be

found lacking in confidence when things looked doubtful, or in joy when they

went well for Otho. Above all, when the senate was summoned to the House,

they  found  it  extraordinarily  hard  always  to  strike  the  right  note.  Silence

would argue arrogance; plain speaking would arouse suspicion; yet flattery

would  be  detected  by  Otho,  who  had  so  lately  been  a  private  citizen,

practising  the  art  himself.  So  they  had  to  turn  and  twist  their  sentences.

Vitellius  they  called  enemy  and  traitor,  the  more  prudent  confining

themselves to such vague generalities. A few ventured to fling the truth at

him, but they always chose a moment of uproar when a great many people

were all shouting at once, or else they talked so loud and fast as to drowntheir own words.

 
Another  cause  of  alarm  was  the  various  portents  vouched  for  by  many

witnesses. In the Capitoline Square, it was said, the figure of Victory had let

the reins of her chariot slip from her hands: a ghost of superhuman size had

suddenly burst out of the chapel of Juno: a statue of the sainted Julius on the

island in the Tiber had, on a fine, still day, turned round from the west and

faced the east: an ox had spoken in Etruria: animals had given birth to strange

monsters. Many were the stories of these occurrences, which in primitive

ages are observed even in time of peace, though now we only hear of them in

time of panic. But the greatest damage at the moment, and the greatest alarm

for  the  future,  was  caused  by  a  sudden  rising  of  the  Tiber.  Immensely

swollen, it carried away the bridge on piles, and, its current being stemmed

by the heavy ruins, it flooded not only the flat, low-lying portions of the city,

but also districts that seemed safe from inundation. Many people were swept

away in the streets, still more were overtaken by the flood in shops or in their

beds at home. The result was a famine, since food was scarce, and the poor

were deprived of their means of livelihood. Blocks of flats, the foundations of

which had rotted in the standing water, collapsed when the river sank. No

sooner had the panic caused by the flood subsided than it was found that,

whereas Otho was preparing an expedition, its route over the Martian Plain

and up the Flaminian Road was blocked. Though probably caused by chance,

or the course of Nature, this mishap was turned into a miraculous omen of

impending disaster.

 
 

 
                                      Otho's Plans

 
 

 
Otho had held a purification of the city and meditated his plans for the war.

Recognizing that the Pennine and Cottian Alps and all the other passes into

Gaul were held by Vitellius, he decided to invade Narbonese Gaul by sea. His

fleet was now a strong and reliable arm, devoted to his cause. For he had

formed  the  full  strength  of  a  legion  out  of  the  survivors  of  the  Mulvian

Bridge massacre, whom Galba's cruelty had kept in prison, and to all the

marines he had held out hopes of honourable service. To the fleet he attached

the cohorts of the City Garrison and a large force of Guards. These were theflower  of  the  army  and  its  chief  strength,  well  able  to  advise  their  own

generals and to take good care of them. The command of the expedition was

entrusted to Antonius Novellus and Suedius Clemens, both senior centurions,

and to Aemilius Pacensis, to whom Otho had restored his commission, of

which Galba had deprived him. In charge of the fleet he still retained the

freedman Moschus to keep an eye on his betters. In command of the cavalry

and  infantry  he  placed  Suetonius  Paulinus,  Marius  Celsus,  and  Annius

Gallus, but the man in whom he put most faith was the Prefect of the Guards,

Licinius  Proculus.  This  officer  had  shown  himself  efficient  in  garrison

service,  but  was  without  any  experience  of  warfare.  He  maligned  the

characteristic virtues of his colleagues, Paulinus' power of influence, Celsus'

energy, Gallus' ripe judgement, and being a knave and no fool, he easily got

the better of men who were both honest and loyal.

 
It was about this time that Cornelius Dolabella was banished to the colony of

Aquinum, though not kept in close or dishonourable confinement. There was

no charge against him: the stigma upon him was his ancient name and kinship

to  Galba.  Otho  issued  orders  that  several  of  the  magistrates  and  a  large

number of ex-consuls were to join the expedition, not to take part in the

campaign or to assist in any way, but simply as a friendly escort. Among

these was Lucius Vitellius, whom he treated neither as an emperor's brother

nor as the brother of an enemy, but just like anybody else. Much anxiety was

aroused for the safety of the city, where all classes feared danger. The leading

members of the senate were old and infirm, and enervated by a long period of

peace: the aristocracy were inefficient and had forgotten how to fight: the

knights knew nothing of military service. The more they all tried to conceal

their alarm, the more obvious it became. Some of them, on the other hand,

went  in  for  senseless  display,  and  purchased  beautiful  armour  and  fine

horses:  others  procured  as  provisions  of  war  elaborate  dinner-services  or

some  other  contrivance  to  stimulate  a  jaded  taste.  Prudent  men  were

concerned for the country's peace: the frivolous, without a thought for the

future, were inflated by empty hopes: a good many, whose loss of credit

made peace unwelcome, were delighted at the general unrest, feeling safer

among uncertainties.

 
Though the cares of state were too vast to arouse any interest in the masses,

yet as the price of food rose, and the whole revenue was devoted to military

purposes, the common people gradually began to realize the evils of war.During the revolt of Vindex they had not suffered so much. Being carried on

in the provinces between the legionaries and the natives of Gaul it was to all

intents a foreign war, and the city had not been affected. For from the time

when the sainted Augustus organized the rule of the Caesars the wars of the

Roman people had been fought in distant countries: all the anxiety and all the

glory fell to the emperor alone. Under Tiberius and Caligula the country only

suffered from the evils of peace. Scribonianus' rising against Claudius was no

sooner heard of than crushed. Nero had been dethroned more by rumours and

dispatches than by force of arms. But now not only the legions and the fleet,

but, as had seldom happened before, the Guards and the City Garrison were

called out for the campaign. Behind them were the East and the West and all

the forces of the empire, material for a long war under any other generals. An

attempt was made to delay Otho's departure by pointing out the impiety of his

not having replaced the sacred shields in the temple of Mars. But delay had

ruined Nero: Otho would have none of it. And the knowledge that Caecina

had already crossed the Alps acted as a further stimulus.

 
Accordingly, on the fourteenth of March he commended the government of

the country to the senate, and granted to the restored exiles all the rest of the

property confiscated by Nero which had not yet been sold for the imperial

treasury. The gift was a just one, and made a very good impression, but as a

matter of fact it was nullified by the haste with which the work of collecting

the money had been conducted. He then summoned a public meeting, and,

after extolling the majesty of Rome and praising the wholehearted adherence

of the senate and people to his cause, he used very moderate language against

the Vitellian party, criticizing the legions more for folly than treason, and

making no mention of Vitellius himself. This may have been due to his own

moderation, or it may be that the writer of the speech felt some qualms for his

own  safety,  and  therefore  refrained  from  insulting  Vitellius.  For  it  was

generally believed that as in strategy he took the advice of Suetonius Paulinus

and Marius Celsus, so too in political matters he employed the talents of

Galerius  Trachalus.  Some  people  even  thought  they  could  recognize

Trachalus' style of oratory, fluent and sonorous, well adapted to tickle the

ears of the crowd: and as he was a popular pleader his style was well known.

The  crowd's  loud  shouts  of  applause  were  in  the  best  style  of  flattery,

excessive and insincere. Men vied with each other in their enthusiasm and

prayers for his success, much as though they were sending off the dictatorCaesar or the emperor Augustus. Their motive was neither fear nor affection,

but  a  sheer  passion  for  servility.  One  can  see  the  same  in  households  of

slaves, where each obeys his own interest and the common welfare counts for

nothing.  On  his  departure  Otho  entrusted  the  peace  of  the  city  and  the

interests of the empire to his brother Salvius Titianus.

 THE
HISTORIES:
BOOK I

 
                                      BOOK II 
                              Vespasian and the East

 
Meanwhile, on the other side of Europe, Fortune was already sowing the

seeds of a dynasty, the varying fortunes of which were destined to bring at

one time happiness to the country and success to its rulers, at another misery

to the country and to the rulers destruction.

 
Before Galba's fall Titus Vespasianus had been dispatched by his father from

Judaea to Rome. The ostensible reason of his journey was to show respect to

the new emperor, and to solicit some post for which his years now fitted him.

However,  the  popular  passion  for  invention  suggested  that  he  had  been

summoned to be adopted. This rumour was based on the fact that Galba was

old and childless: the public never wearies of appointing successors until the

choice is made. The character of Titus gave still more colour to it. He seemed

capable  of  filling  any  position.  His  appearance  lacked  neither  charm  nor

dignity.  Vespasian's  successes  also  and  the  utterances  of  certain  oracles

further endorsed the rumour, to say nothing of the chance occurrences which

pass for omens where the wish is father to the thought. It was at Corinth in

Achaia that Titus received the news of Galba's murder, and was assured by

people in the town that Vitellius had declared war. In great perplexity he

summoned  a  few  of  his  friends  and  discussed  all  the  possibilities  of  the

situation. If he continued his journey to Rome he would earn no gratitude for

compliments addressed to another sovereign, and would be held as a hostage

either for Vitellius or for Otho: on the other hand, if he returned to Judaea he

would inevitably offend the victor. However, the struggle was still undecided,

and the father's adherence to the successful party would excuse the conduct

of the son. Or if Vespasian himself assumed sovereignty, they would have to

plan war and forget all about giving offence.

 
Such considerations held him balanced between hope and fear; but ultimately

hope prevailed. Some people believed that his longing to get back to Queen

Berenice fired him to return. True, the young man's fancy was attracted by

Berenice, but he did not allow this to interfere with business. Still his youth

was a time of gay self-indulgence, and he showed more restraint in his own

reign than in his father's. Accordingly he sailed along the coasts of Greece

and Asia Minor, and, skirting the seas which lay upon his left, reached the

islands of Rhodes and Cyprus, whence he made a bolder crossing to Syria.On his way he conceived a desire to visit the temple of Venus at Paphos,

which is famous among all the inhabitants and visitors. It may not be tedious

to give here a short account of the origin of this worship, the ritual of the cult,

and the shape—unparalleled elsewhere—in which the goddess is depicted.

 
According to an old tradition the temple was founded by King Aerias, and

some people maintain that the goddess bears the same name. A more modern

version states that the temple was consecrated by Cinyras, on the spot where

the goddess landed when the sea gave her birth. The method of divination,

however,  according  to  this  account,  was  imported  from  elsewhere  by  the

Cilician Tamiras, and an arrangement was made that the descendants of both

families should preside over the rites. Later, however, it seemed wrong that

the royal line should have no prerogative, so the descendants of the foreigner

resigned the practice of the art which they had themselves introduced, and

now  the  priest  whom  you  consult  is  always  of  the  line  of  Cinyras.  They

accept any victim that is offered, but males are preferred. They put most faith

in kids' entrails. Blood must not be poured on the altar, at which they offer

only prayers and fire untainted by smoke. Although the altars stand in the

open air they are never wetted by rain. The goddess is not represented in

human form; the idol is a sort of circular pyramid, rising from a broad base to

a small round top, like a turning-post. The reason of this is unknown.

 
Titus inspected the temple treasures and the offerings made by various kings,

and other curiosities which the Greek passion for archaeology attributes to a

dim antiquity. He then consulted the oracle first about his voyage. Learning

that the sea was calm, and that no obstacles stood in his way, he sacrificed a

large number of victims, and put covert questions about his own fortunes.

The priest, whose name was Sostratus, seeing that the entrails were uniformly

favourable,  and  that  the  goddess  assented  to  Titus'  ambitious  schemes,

returned at the moment a brief and ordinary reply, but afterwards sought a

private interview and revealed the future to him. So Titus returned to his

father with heightened hopes, and amid the general anxiety of the provinces

and their armies his arrival spread boundless confidence of success.

 
Vespasian had already broken the back of the Jewish war. Only the siege of

Jerusalem remained. That this proved a difficult and laborious task was due

rather to the high situation of the town and the stubborn superstition of its

inhabitants  than  to  any  adequate  provision  enabling  them  to  endure  thehardships  of  the  siege.  Vespasian  had,  as  we  have  already  stated,  three

legions  well  tried  in  war.  Four  others  were  under  Mucianus'  command.

Although these had never seen war, yet their envy of the neighbouring army's

fame had banished sloth. Indeed, as the former were hardened by work and

danger, so the latter owed their ardour to their unbroken inaction, and their

shame at having no share in the war. Both generals had, besides auxiliary

infantry and cavalry, foreign fleets and allied princes, and a fame that rested

on widely differing claims.

 
Vespasian was an indefatigable campaigner. He headed the column, chose

the camping-ground, never ceasing by night or day to use strategy, and, if

need  be,  the  sword  to  thwart  the  enemy.  He  ate  what  he  could  get,  and

dressed  almost  like  a  common  soldier.  Indeed,  save  for  his  avarice,  he

matched  the  generals  of  old  days.  Mucianus,  on  the  other  hand,  was

distinguished by his wealth and luxury, and his general superiority to the

standards  of  a  private  person.  He  was  the  better  speaker,  and  a  skilful

administrator and statesman. Their combined qualities would have made a

fine emperor, if one could have blended their virtues and omitted their vices.

Governing  as  they  did  the  neighbouring  provinces  of  Judaea  and  Syria,

jealousy at first led to quarrels. However, on the death of Nero, they forgot

their dislike and joined hands. It was their friends who first brought them

together, and subsequently Titus became the chief bond of union and for the

common good suppressed their ignoble jealousy. Both by nature and training

he had charm to fascinate even such a man as Mucianus. The tribunes and

centurions and the common soldiers were attracted, each according to his

character, either by Titus' meritorious industry or by his gay indulgence in

pleasure.

 
Before the arrival of Titus both armies had sworn allegiance to Otho. News

travels fast in such cases, but civil war is a slow and serious undertaking, and

the East, after its long repose, was now for the first time beginning to arm for

it. In earlier times all the fiercest civil wars broke out in Italy or Cisalpine

Gaul among the forces of the West. Pompey, Cassius, Brutus, and Antony all

courted disaster by carrying the war oversea. Syria and Judaea often heard of

Caesars, but seldom saw one. There were no mutinies among the soldiers.

They merely made demonstrations against Parthia with varying success. Even

in the last civil war the peace of these provinces had been untroubled by the

general confusion. Later they were loyal to Galba. But when they heard thatOtho and Vitellius were engaged in a wicked contest for the possession of the

Roman world, the troops began to chafe at the thought that the prizes of

empire  should  fall  to  others,  while  their  own  lot  was  mere  compulsory

submission. They began to take stock of their strength. Syria and Judaea had

seven legions on the spot with a vast force of auxiliaries. Next came Egypt

with two legions: beyond lay Cappadocia and Pontus, and all the forts along

the  Armenian  frontier.  Asia  and  the  remaining  provinces  were  rich  and

thickly populated. As for the islands, their girdle of sea was safe from the

enemy and aided the prosecution of the war.

 
The generals were well aware of the soldiers' feelings, but decided to await

the issue between Vitellius and Otho. 'In civil war,' they reckoned, 'there are

no sure ties to unite victor and vanquished. It matters little which survives:

even good generals are corrupted by success: as for Otho and Vitellius, their

troops are quarrelsome, lazy, and luxurious, and they are both the victims of

their  own  vices.  One  will  fall  on  the  field  and  the  other  succumb  to  his

success.' So Vespasian and Mucianus postponed their attack for the present.

They were themselves recent converts to the project of war, which the others

had long fostered from various motives. The better sort were animated by

patriotism, many by mere love of plunder, some by the uncertainty of their

own fortunes. Thus, though their motives differed, all, good and bad alike,

agreed in their eager desire for war.

 
About this time Achaia and Asia were thrown into a groundless panic by a

rumour that 'Nero was at hand'. The accounts of his death being many and

various, people were all the more inclined to allege and to believe that he was

still alive. We shall mention in the course of this work the attempts and the

fate  of  the  other  pretenders.  This  time  it  was  a  slave  from  Pontus,  or,

according to other traditions, a freedman from Italy. His skill as a singer and

harpist,  combined  with  his  facial  resemblance  to  Nero,  gave  him  some

credentials for imposture. He bribed some penniless and vagabond deserters

by dazzling promises to join him, and they all set out to sea. A storm drove

them on to the island of Cythnus, where he found some troops homeward

bound on leave from the East. Some of these he enrolled, killing all who

resisted, and then proceeded to plunder the local merchants and arm all the

sturdiest of the slaves. Finding a centurion named Sisenna carrying home a

pair of silver hands as a token of alliance from the army in Syria to the

Household Guards, he tried by various devices to seduce him, until Sisennatook fright and escaped secretly from the island in fear of violence. Thus the

panic  spread.  The  great  name  of  Nero  attracted  many  who  pined  for

revolution and hated the existing state of things. The rumours waxed daily,

until a chance dispelled them.

 
Galba had entrusted the government of Galatia and Pamphylia to Calpurnius

Asprenas, who had been granted an escort of two triremes from the fleet at

Misenum. It so happened that with these he touched at Cythnus. The rebels

lost no time in appealing to the ship's captains in the name of Nero. The

pretender,  assuming  an  air  of  melancholy,  appealed  to  'the  loyalty  of  his

former soldiers', and begged them to establish him in Syria or Egypt. The

captains either from sympathy or guile alleged that they must talk to their

men,  and  would  come  back  when  they  had  prepared  all  their  minds.

However,  they  faithfully  made  a  full  report  to  Asprenas,  on  whose

instructions they boarded the ship and killed the impostor, whoever he was.

The man's eyes and hair and ferocious look were so remarkable that the body

was carried into Asia and thence to Rome.

 
 

 
                          The Trial of Annius Faustus

 
 

 
In a country so divided and tossed by frequent change of rulers between

liberty and licence even small events caused serious disturbance. It happened

that Vibius Crispus, a man whose wealth, influence, and ability had won him

a reputation that was great rather than good, had impeached before the senate

a man of equestrian rank, called Annius Faustus, who had been a professional

informer under Nero. The senate had recently in Galba's principate passed a

resolution authorizing the prosecution of informers. This resolution had been

variously applied from time to time, and interpreted rigorously or leniently

according as the defendant was helpless or influential. But it still retained

some terrors. Crispus, moreover, had exerted all his powers to secure the

conviction of the man who had informed against his brother. He had, in fact,

induced a large proportion of the senate to demand that Faustus should be

sent  to  execution  undefended  and  unheard.  However,  with  others,  the

defendant gained a great advantage from his prosecutor's undue influence.

'We  must  give  him  time,'  they  argued,  'the  charges  must  be  published:however hateful the criminal his case must be properly heard.' At first this

advice prevailed. The trial was postponed for a few days. At length came the

conviction of Faustus, which aroused in the country less satisfaction than his

vile character warranted. People recalled the fact that Crispus himself had

turned  informer  with  pecuniary  profit.  It  was  not  the  penalty  but  the

prosecutor that was unpopular.

 
 

 
                            Otho's Measures of Defence

 
 

 
Meanwhile the war opened successfully for Otho. At his order the armies of

Dalmatia and Pannonia started from their base. They comprised four legions,

each of which had sent forward detachments two thousand strong. The rest

followed at a short interval: the Seventh legion raised by Galba, the Eleventh

and Thirteenth, both composed of veteran troops, and the Fourteenth, which

had  won  great  distinction  by  crushing  the  rebellion  in  Britain.  Nero  had

further  increased  their  glory  by  choosing  them  for  special  service,  which

accounts for their lasting loyalty to Nero and their keen support of Otho. But

the stronger their numbers the greater their self-confidence and the slower

their  march.  The  cavalry  and  auxiliaries  preceded  the  main  body  of  the

legions. From Rome itself came no mean force, five regiments of Guards

with some detachments of cavalry and the First legion. To these were added

an irregular force of 2,000 gladiators, a shameful assistance of which during

the civil wars even strict generals availed themselves. Annius Gallus was

placed in command of these forces with Vestricius Spurinna, and they were

sent forward to hold the line of the Po. Their first plans had failed, Caecina,

whom Otho had hoped to hold within the Gallic provinces, having already

crossed  the  Alps.  Under  Otho's  personal  command  marched  picked

detachments of his Body Guard and the rest of the Household troops, together

with reservists of the Guard and a large force of marines. He let no luxury

either delay or disgrace his march. In an iron breast-plate he marched on foot

at the head of his troops, looking rough and dishevelled, quite unlike his

reputation.

 
Fortune smiled on his first efforts. By sea his fleet held most of the Italian

coast right up to the foot of the Maritime Alps. To secure these mountainsand  attack  the  province  of  Narbonese  Gaul  he  had  placed  in  command

Suedius  Clemens,  Antonius  Novellus,  and  Aemilius  Pacensis.  Pacensis,

however,  was  made  a  prisoner  by  his  mutinous  troops:  Novellus  had  no

authority: Clemens' command rested on popularity, and he was as greedy of

battle  as  he  was  criminally  blind  to  insubordination.  No  one  could  have

imagined they were in Italy, on the soil of their native land. As though on

foreign shores and among an enemy's towns, they burnt, ravaged, plundered,

with results all the more horrible since no precautions had been taken against

danger. The fields were full, the houses open. The inhabitants came to meet

them with their wives and children, and were lured by the security of peace

into all the horrors of war. The Governor of the Maritime Alps at that time

was Marius Maturus. He summoned the inhabitants, whose fighting strength

was ample, and proposed to resist at the frontier the Othonians' invasion of

the province. But at the first engagement the mountaineers were cut down

and dispersed. They had assembled in random haste; they knew nothing of

military service or discipline, nothing of the glory of victory or the disgrace

of flight.

 
Enraged by this engagement, Otho's troops visited their indignation on the

town  of  Albintimilium.  The  battle  had  brought  them  no  booty,  for  the

peasants were poor and their armour worthless, and being swift of foot, with

a good knowledge of the country, they had escaped capture. However, the

soldiers sated their greed at the expense of the innocent town. A Ligurian

woman afforded a fine example of courage which made their conduct the

more odious. She had concealed her son, and when the soldiers, who believed

that she had hidden some money as well, demanded from her under torture

where she was keeping him concealed, she pointed to her belly and replied,

'He is in hiding.' No subsequent tortures nor even death itself could bring her

to change that brave and noble answer.

 
Panic-stricken couriers brought to Fabius Valens the news that Otho's fleet

was threatening the province of Narbonese Gaul, which had sworn allegiance

to  Vitellius.  Representatives  from  the  Roman  colonies  also  arrived

beseeching his aid. He dispatched two cohorts of the Tungri and four troops

of horse, together with the entire cavalry regiment of the Treviri. This force

was put under the command of Julius Classicus, and part of it was detained in

the colony of Forum Julii, since if the whole force marched inland and the

sea-board  were  left  unprotected  Otho's  fleet  would  swoop  down  at  once.Twelve troops of cavalry and a picked body of auxiliaries marched against

the  enemy:  these  were  reinforced  by  a  Ligurian  cohort  which  had  long

garrisoned this district, and a draft of five hundred Pannonian recruits who

had not yet joined their legion.

 
The engagement began promptly. Their line was so arranged that some of the

marines, reinforced by the peasants, held the rising ground by the sea, while

the Guards filled the level space between the hills and the shore. The fleet,

acting in conjunction with the land force, was ready to play its part in the

battle,  and  extended  a  threatening  front  facing  the  coast.  The  Vitellians,

weaker  in  infantry,  put  their  trust  in  their  horse.  The  mountaineers  were

posted on the neighbouring heights, and the auxiliaries massed in close order

behind  the  cavalry.  The  Treviran  cavalry  rashly  charged  the  enemy,  and

meeting Otho's guards in front were simultaneously assailed in the flank by

the peasants, flinging stones. This they could do well enough; and, drafted

among the regulars, they all, bold and timid alike, showed the same courage

in the hour of victory. Panic struck the defeated Vitellians when the fleet

began to harass their rear. They were now surrounded, and would have been

entirely destroyed had not darkness arrested the victors and sheltered their

flight.

 
But though beaten the Vitellians were not cowed. Calling up reinforcements,

they suddenly attacked while the unsuspecting enemy were taking their ease

after the victory. They killed the pickets, broke into the camp and terrified the

sailors. In time the panic subsided. The Othonians seized a hill, defended

their  position,  and  eventually  assumed  the  offensive.  The  slaughter  was

frightful. The officers commanding the Tungri, after a long defence of their

position,  fell  beneath  a  shower  of  weapons.  The  victory  also  cost  the

Othonians heavy loss, for the enemy's cavalry rallied and cut off all who

rashly ventured too far in pursuit. So they agreed to a sort of armistice. As a

safeguard  against  sudden  raids  either  by  the  fleet  on  the  one  side  or  the

cavalry  on  the  other,  the  Vitellians  retired  to  Antipolis,  a  town  of  the

Narbonese province, and the Othonians to Albingaunum in the interior of

Liguria.

 
The fame of this naval victory kept Corsica and Sardinia and the adjacent

islands faithful to Otho's cause. However, Decumus Pacarius, the procurator,

nearly  ruined  Corsica  by  an  act  of  indiscretion,  which  in  a  war  of  suchdimensions could not possibly have affected the issue, and only ended in his

own destruction. He hated Otho and determined to aid Vitellius with all the

forces of Corsica; a useless assistance, even if it had been forthcoming. He

summoned the chief men of the island and disclosed his project. Claudius

Pyrrhicus,  who  commanded  the  Liburnian  cruisers  stationed  there,  and  a

Roman knight named Quintius Certus ventured to oppose him. He ordered

their execution. This overawed the others who were present. So they swore

allegiance to Vitellius, as did also the general mass of ignorant people, who

blindly shared a fear they did not feel. However, when Pacarius began to

enlist them and to harass his undisciplined men with military duties, their

loathing for the unwonted labour set them thinking of their weakness. 'They

lived in an island: Vitellius' legions were in Germany, a long way off: Otho's

fleet had already sacked and plundered districts that had even horse and foot

to  protect  them.'  The  revulsion  was  sudden,  but  did  not  issue  in  overt

resistance.  They  chose  a  suitable  moment  for  their  treachery.  Waiting  till

Pacarius' visitors were gone, they murdered him, stripped and helpless, in his

bath, and killed his comrades too. The heads they bore themselves to Otho,

like enemies' scalps. Neither did Otho reward nor Vitellius punish them. In

the general confusion their deed was overshadowed by more heinous crimes.

 
We have already described how 'Silius' Horse' had admitted the war into the

heart of Italy. No one there either supported Otho or preferred Vitellius. But

prolonged peace had broken their spirits to utter servility. They were an easy

prey to the first comer and cared little who was the better man. All the fields

and cities between the Alps and the Po, the most fertile district in Italy, were

held  by  the  Vitellian  forces,  the  cohorts  sent  forward  by  Caecina  having

already arrived. One of the Pannonian cohorts had been captured at Cremona:

a hundred cavalry and a thousand marines had been cut off between Placentia

and Ticinum. After this success the river and its steep banks were no barrier

to the Vitellian troops: indeed the Batavians and other Germans found the Po

a positive temptation. Crossing suddenly opposite Placentia, they captured a

handful of scouts and created such a panic that the others in terror spread the

false report that Caecina's whole army was upon them.

 
Spurinna, who was holding Placentia, had made up his mind that Caecina had

not yet arrived, and that, if he should, his troops must be kept within their

lines:  he  could  not  pit  three  cohorts  of  guards  with  one  detachment  a

thousand strong, and a few cavalry, against Caecina's veteran army. But hismen were unruly and ignorant of war. Seizing the standards and colours they

broke out, threatening to kill the general who tried to check them and paying

no heed to their superior officers. They even clamoured that Otho was being

betrayed, and Caecina had been summoned. Spurinna yielded unwillingly to

their folly, at first under compulsion, later with a show of sympathy. He was

anxious to gain weight for his advice, should the mutiny cool.

 
At nightfall, with the Po in sight, Spurinna decided to entrench his camp. The

unaccustomed  hard  work  soon  blunted  the  enthusiasm  of  his  town-bred

troops. The older men began to curse their credulity, and to point out the

fearful danger to their small force of being surrounded by Caecina's army in

the open country. Soon a more sober spirit pervaded the camp. The tribunes

and centurions mingled with the men, and every one talked with admiration

of Spurinna's foresight in selecting a powerful and wealthy colony as a strong

base for their operations. Finally Spurinna himself rather explained his plans

than  reproached  their  faults,  and,  leaving  patrols  behind,  succeeded

eventually in leading the rest of the men back to Placentia in a quieter and

more submissive frame of mind. There the walls were repaired, outworks

built,  and  the  turrets  increased  in  height  and  number,  while  Spurinna

provided  not  only  for  arms  and  ammunition  but  also  for  obedience  and

discipline.  This  was  all  his  party  lacked,  for  their  courage  was

unimpeachable.

 
Caecina, on the other hand, seemed to have left his cruelty and profligacy on

the other side of the Alps. He marched through Italy with a well-disciplined

force.  The  people  in  the  country-towns  and  colonies  took  offence  at  his

costume  as  showing  arrogance.  While  they  wore  the  plain  toga,  Caecina

addressed them attired in a parti-coloured plaid and trousers. Moreover, his

wife Salonina rode on a fine horse with purple trappings, and though this did

no one any harm, they grumbled and seemed hurt. It is an ineradicable human

trait to turn critical eyes on new-found fortune, and to insist upon moderation

most of all in those who used to be our equals. Crossing the Po, Caecina tried

to  undermine  the  loyalty  of  the  Othonians  by  negotiations  and  promises.

They retaliated with the same weapons, and when they had finished bandying

empty and fine-sounding phrases about Peace and Union, Caecina devoted all

his attention and plans to an assault on Placentia in terrific force. He knew

that his future reputation rested on the issue of his first engagements.

 But the first day's work savoured more of impatience than of a veteran army's

methods.  The  men  ventured  under  the  walls  without  cover  or  precaution,

drunk and overfed. Meanwhile the amphitheatre, a fine building outside the

walls, was burnt down. It was set on fire either by the attacking force hurling

torches and heated shot and fire-brands, or by the besieged in returning their

fire. The common people of the town harboured a suspicion that fuel for the

fire  had  been  surreptitiously  introduced  from  one  of  the  neighbouring

colonies, and that the motive was jealousy, since no building in Italy could

hold so many people. However it happened, they thought little of it, while

worse  disasters  threatened:  safety  assured,  they  bewailed  it  as  the  worst

calamity they could have suffered. To return, however, to Caecina: he was

repulsed  with  heavy  losses,  and  the  night  was  spent  in  preparations.  The

Vitellians  provided  mantlets,  fascines,  and  penthouses,  to  protect  the

assailants while undermining the walls: the Othonians procured stakes and

huge masses of stone or lead or brass, to break through the enemy's formation

and crush them to pieces. Both parties were actuated by feelings of pride and

ambition. Various encouragements were used, one side praising the strength

of the legions and the German army, the other the reputation of the Guards

and the City Garrison. The Vitellians decried their enemy as lazy effeminates

demoralized  by  the  circus  and  the  theatre:  to  which  they  replied  that  the

Vitellians were a pack of foreigners and barbarians. Meanwhile, Otho and

Vitellius were held up to praise or blame, insult providing the more fruitful

stimulus.

 
Hardly had day dawned before the walls of Placentia bristled with defenders,

and  the  fields  glittered  with  the  soldiers'  armour.  The  Vitellian  legions

advancing in close order with their auxiliaries in scattered bands assailed the

higher portions of the walls with stones and arrows: where the walls were in

disrepair or crumbling from age they came close up to them. The Othonians

above, poising and aiming their weapons with surer effect, rained them down

on the Germans, who came rashly charging under the walls with the wild

songs and scanty dress of their country, brandishing their shields over their

heads. Meanwhile, the legionaries under cover of their mantlets and fascines

set to work to undermine the walls, build up a mound, and assail the gates,

while Otho's Guards rolled on to them with terrific crashes huge millstones,

which they had arranged for this purpose along the walls. Of those beneath,

some  were  crushed  by  the  stones;  others,  wounded  by  darts,  were  leftmangled and bleeding to death. Panic redoubled the slaughter, and the rain of

missiles came all the fiercer from the walls. At last they sacrificed the honour

of their party and beat a retreat. Caecina, ashamed of his rash attempt at

assault, was afraid of looking ridiculous and useless if he sat still in the same

camp.  So  he  crossed  the  Po  and  made  for  Cremona.  As  he  was  retiring,

Turullius Cerialis with a large force of marines, and Julius Briganticus with a

few cavalry, came over to his side. The latter, a Batavian born, had held a

cavalry command: the former was a senior centurion, who was known to

Caecina, as he had served in that capacity in Germany.

 
Spurinna, learning the enemy's route, informed Annius Gallus by letter of all

that had happened, the defence of Placentia and Caecina's plans. Gallus was

leading the First legion to the relief of Placentia, for he doubted the ability of

the weak force of Guards to resist a long siege and the full strength of the

German army. Hearing that Caecina was defeated and making for Cremona,

he halted at Bedriacum, though he found it hard to restrain the ardour of his

troops,  whose  zeal  for  battle  nearly  broke  into  mutiny.  The  village  of

Bedriacum lies between Verona and Cremona, and two Roman disasters have

now given it a sinister notoriety.

 
In the same week Martius Macer gained a victory in the neighbourhood of

Cremona. With great enterprise he had transported his gladiators across the

Po, and suddenly flung them on to the opposite bank. There they routed the

Vitellian  auxiliaries  and  killed  all  who  offered  resistance,  the  rest  taking

flight to Cremona. But Macer checked their victorious ardour, for fear that

the enemy might be reinforced and reverse the fortune of the battle. This

aroused suspicion among the Othonians, who put a bad construction on all

that their generals did. All the least courageous and most impudent of the

troops vied incessantly with each other in bringing various charges against

Annius Gallus, Suetonius Paulinus, and Marius Celsus, for the two latter had

also  been  placed  in  command  by  Otho.  The  most  energetic  in  promoting

mutiny  and  dissension  were  Galba's  murderers,  who,  maddened  by  their

feelings of fear and of guilt, created endless disorder, sometimes talking open

sedition,  sometimes  sending  anonymous  letters  to  Otho.  As  he  always

believed men of the meaner sort and distrusted patriots, he now wavered

nervously, being always irresolute in success and firmer in the face of danger.

He therefore sent for his brother Titianus and gave him the chief command.

 Meanwhile success attended the generalship of Paulinus and Celsus. Caecina

was tortured by his constant failure and the waning reputation of his army.

Repulsed from Placentia, he had lately seen his auxiliaries defeated, and his

patrols constantly worsted in skirmishes more frequent than memorable. Now

that Fabius Valens was close at hand, he determined not to let all the glory of

the war fall to him, and hastened with more zeal than prudence to retrieve his

reputation. About twelve miles distant from Cremona, at a place called Twin

Brethren,  he  carefully  concealed  the  bravest  of  his  auxiliaries  in  a  wood

overlooking the road. The cavalry were ordered to ride forward down the

road and provoke an engagement. They were then to feign flight and lure the

pursuers  on  in  hot  haste  until  they  fell  into  the  ambush.  This  plan  was

betrayed to Otho's generals. Paulinus took charge of the infantry, Celsus of

the horse. A detachment of the Thirteenth legion, four auxiliary cohorts of

foot, and five hundred cavalry were stationed on the left flank. Three cohorts

of the Guards in column occupied the raised high-road. On the right flank

marched the First legion, two auxiliary cohorts of foot, and five hundred

cavalry.  Besides  these  they  moved  out  a  thousand  cavalry—Guards  and

auxiliaries—as a reserve to crown their success, or assist them in difficulties.

 
Before they came to close quarters, the Vitellians began to retire. Celsus,

forewarned of the ruse, halted his men. Whereupon the Vitellians impatiently

rose  from  their  ambush  and,  while  Celsus  slowly  retired,  followed  him

further and further until they plunged headlong into an ambush themselves.

The auxiliaries were on their flanks; the legions faced them in front; and the

cavalry  by  a  sudden  manœuvre  had  closed  in  on  their  rear.  However,

Suetonius Paulinus did not immediately give the signal for his infantry to

charge.  He  was  by  nature  dilatory,  and  preferred  cautiously  reasoned

measures to accidental success. He kept on issuing orders about filling up the

ditches, clearing the fields and extending the line, convinced that it was soon

enough to play for victory when he had taken every precaution against defeat.

This delay gave the Vitellians time to take refuge in the vineyards, where the

interlaced vine-stems made it hard to follow. Adjoining these was a little

wood, from under cover of which they ventured another sally and killed the

foremost of the Guards' cavalry. There Prince Epiphanes was wounded, while

making vigorous efforts to rally Otho's forces.

 
At this point Otho's infantry charged, crushed the opposing line, and even

routed the troops who were hurrying up in support. For Caecina had broughtup his reinforcements not all at once but in separate detachments. These,

arriving in scattered units, and never in sufficient force, only added to the

confusion, since the panic of the rout infected them as well.

 
Mutiny, too, broke out in the camp, because the troops were not all taken into

battle.  Julius  Gratus,  the  camp-prefect,  was  put  in  irons  on  a  charge  of

plotting with his brother, who was fighting on Otho's side. It was known that

the Othonians had arrested the brother, Julius Fronto, on the same charge. For

the rest, such was the universal panic among pursuers and pursued, on the

field  and  in  the  camp,  that  it  was  commonly  said  on  both  sides  that,  if

Suetonius Paulinus had not sounded the retreat, Caecina's whole army might

have  been  destroyed.  Paulinus  maintained  that  he  avoided  any  excessive

strain of work or marching, for fear of exposing his exhausted troops to a

counter-attack from the Vitellians in the camp, who were still fresh for battle:

besides, he had no reserves to fall back on in case of defeat. A few approved

of the general's strategy, but the common opinion was adverse.

 
 

 
                              The Decisive Struggle

 
 

 
This reverse reduced the Vitellians not to despair but to discipline. Not only

was this the case in Caecina's camp, who blamed his men as being readier for

mutiny than for battle, but the troops under Fabius Valens, who had now

reached Ticinum, lost their contempt for the enemy, conceived a desire to

retrieve their glory, and offered their general a more respectful and steady

obedience. There had, indeed, been a serious outbreak of mutiny, the account

of which I may now resume from an earlier chapter, where it seemed wrong

to break the narrative of Caecina's operations. The Batavian auxiliaries, who

had  left  the  Fourteenth  legion  during  the  war  against  Vindex,  heard  of

Vitellius'  rising  while  on  their  way  to  Britain,  and,  as  I  have  already

described, joined Fabius Valens in the country of the Lingones. There they

grew insolent. Whenever they passed the tents of the Roman soldiers, they

boasted loudly that they had coerced the Fourteenth, had deprived Nero of

Italy, and held the whole issue of the war in the hollow of their hand. This

insulted  the  soldiers  and  annoyed  the  general;  brawls  and  quarrels  ruined

good discipline. Ultimately Valens began to suspect that their insubordinationmeant treachery.

 
Accordingly,  on  receiving  the  news  that  Otho's  fleet  had  defeated  the

Treviran cavalry and the Tungri, and was now blockading Narbonese Gaul,

he  determined  at  the  same  time  to  assist  his  allies,  and  by  a  stroke  of

generalship to separate contingents that were so insubordinate and, if united,

so  strong.  He  therefore  ordered  the  Batavians  to  march  to  the  support  of

Narbo. Immediately this order became generally known, the auxiliaries began

to complain and the legionaries to chafe. 'They were being deprived of their

strongest support: here were these invincible veterans promptly withdrawn

directly the enemy came in sight: if the province was more important than the

safety of Rome and the empire, why not all go there? but if Italy was the

corner-stone  of  their  success,  he  ought  not  as  it  were  to  amputate  their

strongest limb.'

 
In answer to this presumptuous criticism, Valens loosed his lictors upon them

and set to work to check the mutiny. They attacked their general, stoned him,

and chased him out of the camp, shouting that he was concealing the spoils of

Gaul and the gold from Vienne, the due reward of their labours. They looted

the  baggage,  ransacked  the  general's  quarters,  and  even  rummaged  in  the

ground with javelins and lances. Valens, in slave's dress, took refuge with a

cavalry officer. Gradually the disorder began to die down. Alfenus Varus, the

camp-prefect, then hit upon the plan of forbidding the centurions to go the

rounds or to have the bugle sounded to summon the men to their duties. No

one  had  anything  to  do:  they  eyed  each  other  in  astonishment,  dismayed

above all at having no one to command them. At first by silent submission, at

last with tearful prayers, they sought pardon. Valens appeared, haggard and

in tears, but above all expectation safe and sound,—joy, sympathy, cheers!

With a wild revulsion of feeling—mobs are always extravagant—they made

a  ring  round  him  with  the  eagles  and  standards,  and  carried  him  to  the

Tribunal  with  loud  praises  and  congratulations.  With  wise  moderation  he

demanded  no  punishment,  but,  to  disarm  suspicion  of  his  good  faith,  he

criticized one or two of them severely. He was well aware that in civil war

the men are allowed more licence than their officers.

 
While they were entrenching themselves at Ticinum they heard the news of

Caecina's  defeat,  and  the  mutiny  nearly  broke  out  afresh:  Valens,  they

thought, had treacherously delayed in order to keep them out of the battle.They refused rest, would not wait for the general, marched on in front of the

standards, hurrying on the bearers, and by a forced march joined Caecina.

Valens had a bad name with Caecina's army. They complained that despite

their greatly inferior numbers he had exposed them to the full force of the

enemy. At the same time, for fear of being despised as defeated cowards,

they excused themselves by exaggerating the strength of the new arrivals. In

fact, though Valens' numbers were larger, and he had almost twice as many

legionaries and auxiliaries as Caecina, yet it was Caecina who enjoyed the

confidence of the men. Apart from his kindness, in which he seemed much

readier  than  Valens,  they  admired  him  for  his  youthful  vigour  and

commanding stature, and liked him too without exactly knowing why. So

there was rivalry between the generals. Caecina mocked at Valens for his

dirty  and  dishonest  ways:Valens  at  Caecina's  pompous  vanity.  But  they

smothered  their  dislike  and  worked  together  for  a  common  end,  writing

frequent letters in which they sacrificed all hope of pardon and heaped abuse

on Otho. Otho's generals refrained from retaliating upon Vitellius, though his

character offered richer scope.

 
In death Otho earned a noble name and Vitellius infamy, yet at this time

people were more afraid of Otho's burning passions than of Vitellius' listless

luxury. The murder of Galba had made Otho feared and hated, while no one

attributed  to  Vitellius  the  outbreak  of  the  war.  It  was  felt  that  Vitellius'

gluttony was a personal disgrace: Otho's excesses, his cruelty and his daring,

spelt more danger to the country. Now that Caecina and Valens had joined

forces, the Vitellians had no longer any reason to avoid a decisive battle.

Otho accordingly held a council to decide whether they should prolong the

war or put their fortune to the test.

 
Suetonius Paulinus, who was considered the most experienced general of his

day, now felt it was due to his reputation to deliver his views on the general

conduct of the war. His contention was that the enemy's interests were best

served by haste, Otho's by delay. He argued thus: 'The whole of Vitellius'

force  has  now  arrived  and  he  has  few  reinforcements  in  his  rear,  for  the

Gallic provinces are in a ferment, and it would be fatal to abandon the Rhine

with all those hostile tribes ready to swarm across it. The troops in Britain are

busy with their own foes and cut off by the sea: the Spanish provinces can

scarcely spare any troops: the Narbonese are seriously alarmed by their recent

reverse and the inroads of our fleet. The country across the Po is shut in bythe Alps and denied all supplies by sea, and, besides, its resources have been

already  exhausted  by  the  passage  of  their  army.  Nowhere  can  they  get

supplies,  and  without  commissariat  no  army  can  be  kept  together.  The

German troops are their strongest fighting arm, but their constitutions will not

be strong enough to stand the change of weather, if we protract the war into

the summer. It has often happened that a force, which seemed irresistible at

first, has dwindled to nothing through the tedium of forced inaction.

 
'On the other hand, our resources are rich and reliable. We have on our side

Pannonia, Moesia, Dalmatia, and the East; the armies there are fresh and

strong; we have Italy and Rome, the Queen of the World, and the Roman

Senate and People: those titles always mean something, though their glory

may sometimes be obscured. We have large public and private resources, and

in civil war a vast quantity of money is stronger than the sword. Our soldiers

are inured to the Italian climate or, at any rate, to heat. We are entrenched

behind the Po: its cities are protected by strong walls and willing hands, and

the defence of Placentia has shown that none of them will yield to the enemy.'

Therefore Otho must remain on the defensive. In a few days the Fourteenth

legion would arrive: its fame alone was great, and the Moesian forces would

be with it. He should, at any rate, postpone his deliberations until then, and

fight, if fight he must, with augmented strength.

 
Marius Celsus supported Paulinus. Annius Gallus had been hurt a few days

before by a fall from his horse, but messengers were sent to inquire his views,

and they reported that he too agreed. Otho inclined to a decisive engagement.

His  brother  Titianus  and  Proculus,  the  prefect  of  the  Guard,  with  all  the

impatience of inexperience, stoutly maintained that fortune and Providence,

and  Otho's  own  good  genius  inspired  his  policy,  and  would  inspire  its

performance. They had descended to flattery by way of checking opposition.

When it was decided to take the offensive, the question arose whether Otho

in person should take part in the battle or hold himself in reserve. His evil

counsellors again carried their point. Otho was to retire to Brixellum, and, by

withdrawing from the hazards of the field, reserve himself for the supreme

control  of  the  campaign  and  of  the  empire.  To  this  Paulinus  and  Celsus

offered no further opposition, for fear of seeming to endanger the person of

their prince. From this day dates the decline of Otho's party. Not only did he

take with him a considerable force of the Guards, Body Guard, and cavalry,

but the spirit of the troops who remained behind was broken. The men trustedno one but Otho, and Otho no one but the men. His generals were under

suspicion and their authority left in doubt.

 
None  of  these  arrangements  failed  to  reach  the  ears  of  the  Vitellians.

Desertions were frequent, as they always are in civil war, and the scouts in

their eagerness to discover the enemy's plans always failed to conceal their

own. Caecina and Valens, counting on the fatal impatience of the enemy,

remained quietly on their guard to see what they would do: for it is always

wisdom to profit by another's folly. Feigning an intention of crossing the Po,

they  began  to  construct  a  bridge,  partly  as  a  demonstration  against  the

gladiators on the opposite bank, partly to find something for their idle troops

to do. Boats were placed at equal intervals with their heads up stream and

fastened together by strong wooden planks. They also cast anchors from them

to ensure the solidity of the bridge, but they allowed the hawsers to drift

slack, so that when the river rose the boats might all rise with it without the

line being broken. To guard the bridge a high tower was built out on the end

boat,  from  which  they  could  repulse  the  enemy  with  various  artillery.

Meanwhile the Othonians had built a tower on the bank and kept up a steady

shower of stones and torches.

 
In midstream there was an island, to which the gladiators tried to make their

way in boats, but the Germans swam over and got there first. When a good

number of them had swam across, Macer manned some Liburnian cruisers

and attacked them with the bravest of his gladiators. But they fought with less

courage than soldiers, and from their unsteady boats they could not shoot so

well as the others, who had a firm footing on the bank. Swaying this way and

that in their alarm, the sailors and the marines were beginning to get in each

other's way, when the Germans actually leapt into the shallows, caught hold

of the boats by the stern, and either clambered up by the gangways or sunk

them bodily with their own hands. All this took place before the eyes of both

armies, and the higher rose the spirits of the Vitellians, the greater became the

indignation of the Othonians against Macer, the author and cause of their

disaster.

 
The remainder of the boats were eventually dragged off, and the battle ended

in  flight.  The  army  demanded  Macer's  execution.  He  had  been  actually

wounded by a lance that had been flung at him, and the soldiers were rushing

on him with drawn swords when some tribunes and centurions intervened andrescued him. Soon after this, Vestricius Spurinna, on Otho's orders, brought

up  a  reinforcement  of  the  Guards,  leaving  behind  a  small  garrison  at

Placentia, and before long, Otho sent the consul-elect, Flavius Sabinus, to

take command of Macer's force. This change pleased the soldiers, but the

frequent  mutinies  made  the  generals  unwilling  to  assume  such  a  perilous

command.

 
In some of my authorities I find a statement that either a growing fear of war

or dislike of the two emperors, whose discreditable misconduct grew daily

more notorious, led the armies to hesitate whether they should not give up the

struggle and either themselves combine to choose an emperor or refer the

choice to the senate. This, it is suggested, was the motive of Otho's generals

in advising delay, and Paulinus in particular had high hopes, since he was the

senior  ex-consul,  and  a  distinguished  general  who  had  earned  a  brilliant

reputation by his operations in Britain. For my own part, while I am ready to

admit that a few people may have tacitly wished for peace instead of civil

war, or for a good and virtuous emperor instead of two who were the worst of

criminals, yet I imagine that Paulinus was much too wise to hope that in a

time of universal corruption the people would show such moderation. Those

who had sacrificed peace in a passion for war were not likely to stop the war

from any affection for peace. Nor was it possible that armies whose language

and characteristics differed so widely should ever come to such an agreement.

As for the officers; nearly all of them were extravagant, bankrupt, and guilty

of some crime: they had not a good enough conscience to put up with any

emperor who was not as vicious as themselves and under an obligation for

their services.

 
The  old  ingrained  human  passion  for  power  matured  and  burst  into

prominence with the growth of the empire. With straiter resources equality

was easily preserved. But when once we had brought the world to our feet

and exterminated every rival state or king, we were left free to covet power

without fear of interruption. It was then that strife first broke out between

patricians  and  plebeians:  at  one  time  arose  seditious  tribunes,  at  another

tyrannous consuls: in the Forum at Rome were sown the first seeds of civil

war. Before long, Marius, rising from the lowest ranks of the people, and

Sulla, the most cruel of all the nobles, crushed our liberty by force of arms

and substituted a despotism. Then came Pompey, whose aims, though less

patent, were no better than theirs. From that time onwards the one end soughtwas supreme power in the state. Even at Pharsalia and Philippi the citizen

armies did not lay down their arms. How then can we suppose that the troops

of Otho and Vitellius would have willingly stopped the war? The same anger

of heaven, the same human passions, the same criminal motives drove them

into discord. True these wars were each settled by a single battle, but that was

due to the generals' cowardice. However, my reflections on the ancient and

the modern character have carried me too far: I must now resume the thread

of our narrative.

 
When  Otho  started  for  Brixellum,  he  left  his  brother  Titianus  in  nominal

command, though the real power lay with the prefect Proculus. As for Celsus

and Paulinus, no use was made of their experience, and their empty titles

were used as a screen for other people's blunders. The tribunes and centurions

felt themselves in an ambiguous position, seeing the better generals sacrificed

and  the  worst  in  command.  The  men  were  full  of  spirit,  but  preferred

criticizing to carrying out their officers' orders. It was decided to advance and

encamp four miles west of Bedriacum.

 
Though  it  was  spring,  and  rivers  abounded,  the  men  were  very  foolishly

allowed to suffer from want of water. Here a council of war was held, for

Otho kept sending dispatches urging haste, and the soldiers kept clamouring

for their emperor to lead them. Many demanded that the troops stationed

across the Po should be brought up. It is not so easy to decide what was the

best thing they could have done as to be sure that what they did do was the

worst.

 
They were in marching order, not fighting trim, and their objective was the

confluence of the Po and the Arda, sixteen miles away. Celsus and Paulinus

refused to expose their troops, fatigued by the march and under heavy kit, to

the  assault  of  an  enemy  who,  while  still  fresh  after  covering  barely  four

miles, would certainly attack them, either while they were in the disorder of a

marching column, or when they had broken up to dig trenches. However,

Titianus and Proculus, worsted in argument, appealed to their authority: and

there arrived post-haste a Numidian orderly with a peremptory dispatch from

Otho, criticizing his generals' inaction, and ordering them to bring matters to

a head. He was sick of delay and too impatient to live on hope.

 
On  that  same  day,  while  Caecina  was  busy  with  the  bridge-buildingoperations, two officers of the Guards came and demanded an interview. He

was preparing to hear and answer their proposals, when some scouts burst in

with the news that the enemy were close at hand. The officers' conversation

was thus interrupted, and it was left uncertain whether they were broaching a

hostile plot or a piece of treachery, or some honest plan. Caecina, dismissing

the officers, rode back to the camp, where he found that Valens had given

orders to sound for battle, and the troops were already under arms. While the

legions were balloting for the order in which they were to take the field, the

cavalry rode out and charged. Strange to say, they would have been hurtled

back upon the trenches by a smaller force of Othonians, had not the Italian

legion bravely stopped them by drawing their swords and forcing them to go

back and resume the fight. The Vitellian legions formed without any disorder,

for  though  the  enemy  were  close  at  hand,  thick  plantations  hid  the

approaching force. In the Othonian army the generals were nervous and the

men ill-disposed towards them: their march was hindered by carts and camp-

followers, and the high road, with its deep ditches on either side, was too

narrow  even  for  a  peaceful  march.  Some  of  the  men  formed  round  their

standards, others went searching for their place: on every side there was an

uproar as men ran about shouting to each other: the boldest kept pressing on

to the front, while the tide of the timid ebbed to the rear.

 
Amid the confusion of this sudden panic somebody invented a story that

Vitellius' army had abandoned his cause, whereupon an unwarrantable glee

relaxed their efforts. It was never fully known whether this report was spread

by  Vitellian  scouts  or  whether  it  was  started  on  Otho's  side,  either  by

treachery or chance. Losing all their thirst for battle the Othonians actually

broke into a cheer. The enemy answered with angry shouts, and most of

Otho's soldiers, having no idea what caused the cheering, feared treachery. At

this point the Vitellian line charged. They were fresh, and in good order,

stronger and more numerous. However, the Othonians, despite their disorder,

fewer numbers, and fatigue, offered a stubborn resistance. The ground was

encumbered  with  orchards  and  vineyards,  and  the  character  of  the  battle

varied accordingly. They fought now from a distance, now at close quarters,

and charged sometimes in detachment, sometimes in column. On the raised

high-road they fought hand to hand, using the weight of their bodies and their

shields. They gave up throwing their javelins and cut through helmet and

breastplate with sword and axe. Each man knew his foe; they were in view ofthe other troops; and they fought as if the whole issue of the war depended on

them.

 
It happened that two legions met in the open fields between the high road and

the Po. These were: for Vitellius the Twenty-first, commonly called Rapax, a

regiment of old renown; and for Otho the First Adiutrix, which had never

been in battle before, but was full of spirit and eager to win its first laurels.

Their charge overthrew the front ranks of the Twenty-first, and they carried

off its eagle. Fired with indignation, the Twenty-first rallied and charged the

front of the enemy, killing the commanding officer, Orfidius Benignus, and

capturing many of their colours.

 
On the other flank the Fifth drove the Thirteenth off the field. The Fourteenth

were surrounded by the numbers that attacked them. Otho's generals had long

ago fled. Caecina and Valens began to bring up the reserves to the support of

their men, and, as a fresh reinforcement, there arrived Varus Alfenus with his

Batavians. They had routed the gladiators by confronting them and cutting

them to pieces in the river before their transports could land, and flushed by

their victory came charging in upon the flank of the enemy.

 
Their centre broken, the Othonians fled in disorder, making for Bedriacum.

The distance was immense; the road encumbered with heaps of dead. This

made the slaughter all the greater, for in civil war captives cannot be turned

to  profit.  Suetonius  Paulinus  and  Licinius  Proculus  avoided  the  camp  at

Bedriacum by diverse routes. Vedius Aquila, who commanded the Thirteenth

legion, was so paralysed by fear that he allowed himself to fall into the hands

of the indignant troops. It was still broad daylight when he entered the camp.

Immediately  a  crowd  of  mutinous  fugitives  came  clamouring  round  him.

They spared neither abuse nor violence, assailing him as a deserter and a

traitor. They could bring no special charge against him, but the mob always

lay their own disgrace on some one else. Night came to the aid of Titianus

and Celsus, for Annius Gallus had already placed sentinels on guard and got

the men under control. Using remonstrances, prayers, and commands, he had

induced them not to add to the disaster of their defeat by murdering their own

friends. Whether the war was over, or whether they wanted to fight again, in

defeat, he told them, union was the one thing that could help them. All the

other troops were crushed by the blow. The Guards complained that they had

been beaten, not by the enemy's valour, but by sheer treachery. 'Why,' theysaid,  'even  the  Vitellians  have  won  no  bloodless  victory.  We  beat  their

cavalry and captured a standard from one of their legions. We still have Otho

left and all the troops with him on the other side of the Po. The Moesian

legions are on their way. There is a large force left at Bedriacum. These, at

any rate, have not been defeated yet. Better fall, if need be, on the field.' Now

exasperated, now depressed by these reflections, they were in a state of blank

despair, which more often aroused their anger than their fear.

 
The Vitellian army halted at the fifth mile-stone on the road from Bedriacum.

Their generals would not venture to storm the camp that same day, and hoped

the  enemy  would  consent  to  surrender.  However,  although  they  were  in

fighting trim, and had no implements for digging trenches, they felt safe with

their arms and the pride of victory. On the next day there was no doubt about

the wishes of the Othonians. Even those who showed most spirit had now

changed their minds. So they sent a deputation. The Vitellian generals had no

hesitation  in  granting  terms.  However,  they  detained  the  deputation  for  a

short time, which caused some qualms to those who did not know whether it

had been successful. At length the envoys returned, and the gates of the camp

were opened. Then both victors and vanquished burst into tears, and with a

sort of sorrowful satisfaction cursed their fate of civil war. There in one tent

were men of both armies, nursing a wounded brother or some other relative.

Their  hopes  of  recompense  were  doubtful:  all  that  was  certain  was

bereavement and grief, for no one was so fortunate as to mourn no loss. They

searched for the body of the fallen officer, Orfidius, and burnt it with due

solemnity. Of the other dead, some were buried by their relatives, the rest

were left lying on the ground.

 
Otho  was  awaiting  news  of  the  battle  with  perfect  confidence  and  firm

resolve.  First  came  a  disquieting  rumour.  Soon  fugitives  from  the  field

revealed the ruin of his cause. But the soldiers in their zeal did not wait to

hear their emperor speak. 'Keep a good heart,' they said, 'you still have fresh

forces  left,  and,  as  for  us,  we  are  ready  to  risk  everything  and  suffer

everything.' Nor was this flattery. In a wild passion of enthusiasm they urged

him to march to the field and restore the fortunes of his party. Those who

were near him clasped his knees, while those who stood further off stretched

out their arms to him. The most eager of all was Plotius Firmus, the Prefect of

the Guard, who besought Otho again and again not to desert a supremely

faithful army, men who had done him such great service. He told him that itshowed more courage to bear misfortune than to give in: that men of vigour

and  courage  cling  to  their  hopes  even  in  the  face  of  disaster:  it  is  only

cowards who let their terror hurry them into despair. Amid all these appeals

the  soldiers  now  cheered,  now  groaned,  according  as  Otho's  expression

showed  signs  of  yielding  or  seemed  to  harden.  Nor  were  these  feelings

confined to Otho's own Guards. The first arrivals from Moesia assured him

that the spirit of the advancing force was just as firm, and that they had

already entered Aquileia. There is no room for doubt that it was still possible

to revive this cruel and pitiable war, so full of uncertainty to both parties.

 
Otho himself disliked the policy of fighting. 'Am I,' he said, 'to expose all

your splendid courage and devotion to further risks? That would be too great

a price to pay for my life. Your high hopes of succeeding, if I were minded to

live, will only swell the glory of my death. We have learnt to know each

other, Fortune and I. Do not reckon the length of my reign. Self-control is all

the harder when a man knows that his fortune cannot last. It was Vitellius

who began the civil war. He originated the policy of fighting for the throne.

But one battle is enough. This is the precedent that I will set. Let posterity

judge me by it. I do not grudge Vitellius his brother, or wife, or children. I

want  neither  revenge  nor  consolation.  Others  may  have  held  the  sceptre

longer, but no one can ever have laid it down so bravely. Am I the man to

allow the flower of Rome in all these famous armies to be mown down once

again and lost to the country? Let me take with me the consciousness that you

would have died for me. But you must stay and live. No more delay. I must

no longer interfere with your chance of pardon, nor you with my resolve. It is

a sort of cowardice to go on talking about the end. Here is your best proof of

my determination: I complain of no one. To blame gods or men is his alone

who fain would keep his life.'

 
After some such speech as this he urged them courteously to hurry away and

not  to  exasperate  the  victor  by  their  hesitation.  To  each  man's  age  and

position  he  paid  due  regard,  using  his  authority  with  the  young  and

persuasion with his elders, while his quiet looks and firm speech helped to

control their ill-timed tears. He gave orders for boats and carriages to be

provided  for  their  departure.  All  petitions  and  letters  containing  any

compliments  to  himself,  or  marked  insults  to  Vitellius,  he  destroyed,  and

distributed his money carefully, not like a man at the point of death. He then

actually  tried  to  comfort  the  sorrowful  fears  of  his  nephew,  SalviusCocceianus,  by  praising  his  attachment  and  chiding  his  alarm.  'Do  you

imagine,' he said, 'that Vitellius will be so hard-hearted as not to show me

some gratitude for saving his whole household? By promptly putting an end

to myself, I deserve to earn some mercy for my family. For it is not in blank

despair, but with my army clamouring for battle, that I determine to save my

country from the last calamities. I have won enough fame for myself and

ennoblement for my posterity; for, after the line of the Julians, Claudians,

Servians, I have been the first to bring the principate into a new family. So

rouse yourself and go on with your life. Never forget that Otho was your

uncle, yet keep your remembrance within bounds.'

 
After  this  he  made  them  all  retire  and  rested  for  a  while.  But  his  last

reflections  were  interrupted  by  a  sudden  disturbance  and  the  news  of  a

mutinous outbreak among the troops. They were threatening to kill all those

who  were  leaving,  and  turned  with  especial  violence  against  Verginius,

whose  house  was  in  a  state  of  siege.  Otho  rebuked  the  ringleaders  and

returned, consenting to receive the adieux of those who were going, until it

was time for them to depart in safety. As the day deepened into evening he

quenched his thirst with a drink of iced water. Two daggers were brought to

him and, after trying them both, he put one under his pillow. Being assured

on inquiry that his friends had started, he spent a peaceful night, not, it is

said, without sleep. At break of day he fell upon his dagger. Hearing his

dying groan, his slaves and freedmen entered with Plotius Firmus, the Prefect

of  the  Guards,  and  found  a  single  wound  in  his  breast.  The  funeral  was

hurried forward out of respect for his own earnest entreaties, for he had been

afraid his head might be cut off and subjected to outrage. The Guard carried

the body, sounding his praises with tears in their eyes, and covering his hands

and  wounded  breast  with  kisses.  Some  of  the  soldiers  killed  themselves

beside the pyre, not because they had harmed Vitellius or feared reprisals, but

from love of their emperor, and to follow his noble example. Similar suicides

became  common  afterwards  at  Bedriacum  and  Placentia,  and  in  other

encampments. An inconspicuous tomb was built for Otho, as being less likely

to be disturbed: and thus he ended his life in his thirty-seventh year.

 
Otho came originally from the borough of Ferentium. His father had been

consul and his grandfather praetor. His mother's family was inferior, but not

without distinction. His boyhood and youth were such as we have seen. By

his two great acts, one most criminal and the other heroic, he earned in equalmeasure the praise and the reprobation of posterity. It would certainly be

beneath the dignity of my task to collect fabulous rumours for the amusement

of my readers, but there are certain popular traditions which I cannot venture

to contradict. On the day of the battle of Bedriacum, according to the account

of the local peasants, a strange bird appeared in a much-frequented grove

near Regium Lepidum. There it sat, unterrified and unmoved, either by the

crowds of people or by the birds which fluttered round it, until the moment at

which  Otho  killed  himself.  Then  it  vanished.  A  calculation  of  the  time

showed that the prodigy's appearance and disappearance coincided with the

beginning of the battle and Otho's death.

 
At his funeral the rage and grief of the soldiers broke out into another mutiny.

This time there was no one to control them. They turned to Verginius and

begged  him  with  threats  now  to  accept  the  principate,  now  to  head  a

deputation  to  Caecina  and  Valens.  However,  Verginius  escaped  them,

slipping out by the back door of his house just as they broke in at the front.

Rubrius Gallus carried a petition from the Guards at Brixellum, and obtained

immediate pardon. Simultaneously Flavius Sabinus surrendered to the victor

the troops under his command.

 
 

 
                                Vitellius' Principate

 
 

 
Now that the war was everywhere ended, a large number of senators, who

had  quitted  Rome  with  Otho  and  been  left  behind  at  Mutina,  found

themselves  in  a  critical  position.  When  the  news  of  the  defeat  reached

Mutina, the soldiers paid no heed to what they took for a baseless rumour,

and,  believing  the  senators  to  be  hostile  to  Otho,  they  treasured  up  their

conversation and put the worst interpretation on their looks and behaviour. In

time  they  broke  into  abusive  reproaches,  seeking  a  pretext  for  starting  a

general massacre, while the senators suffered at the same time from another

source of alarm, for they were afraid of seeming to be slow in welcoming the

victory  of  the  now  predominant  Vitellian  party.  Terrified  at  their  double

danger, they held a meeting. For no one dared to form any policy for himself;

each felt safer in sharing his guilt with others. The town-council of Mutina,

too, kept adding to their anxiety by offering them arms and money, stylingthem with ill-timed respect 'Conscript Fathers'.

 
A remarkable quarrel arose at this meeting. Licinius Caecina attacked Eprius

Marcellus for the ambiguity of his language. Not that the others disclosed

their sentiments, but Caecina, who was still a nobody, recently raised to the

senate,  sought  to  distinguish  himself  by  quarrelling  with  some  one  of

importance, and selected Marcellus, because the memory of his career as an

informer made him an object of loathing. They were parted by the prudent

intervention  of  their  betters,  and  all  then  retired  to  Bononia,  intending  to

continue the discussion there, and hoping for more news in the meantime. At

Bononia they dispatched men along the roads in every direction to question

all  new-comers.  From  one  of  Otho's  freedmen  they  inquired  why  he  had

come away, and were told he was carrying his master's last instructions: the

man  said  that  when  he  had  left,  Otho  was  still  indeed  alive,  but  had

renounced the pleasures of life and was devoting all his thoughts to posterity.

This  filled  them  with  admiration.  They  felt  ashamed  to  ask  any  more

questions—and declared unanimously for Vitellius.

 
Vitellius' brother Lucius was present at their discussion, and now displayed

his willingness to receive their flattery, but one of Nero's freedmen, called

Coenus, suddenly startled them all by inventing the atrocious falsehood that

the Fourteenth legion had joined forces with the troops at Brixellum, and that

their sudden arrival had turned the fortune of the day: the victorious army had

been cut to pieces. He hoped by inventing this good news to regain some

authority for Otho's passports, which were beginning to be disregarded. He

did,  indeed,  thus  insure  for  himself  a  quick  journey  to  Rome,  but  was

executed by order of Vitellius a few days later. However, the senate's danger

was augmented because the soldiers believed the news. Their fears were the

more  acute,  because  it  looked  as  if  their  departure  from  Mutina  was  an

official move of the Council of State, which thus seemed to have deserted the

party. So they refrained from holding any more meetings, and each shifted

for  himself,  until  a  letter  arrived  from  Fabius  Valens  which  quieted  their

fears.  Besides,  the  news  of  Otho's  death  travelled  all  the  more  quickly

because it excited admiration.

 
At Rome, however, there was no sign of panic. The festival of Ceres was

celebrated  by  the  usual  crowds.  When  it  was  reported  in  the  theatre  on

reliable  authority  that  Otho  had  renounced  his  claim,  and  that  FlaviusSabinus, the City Prefect, had made all the troops in Rome swear allegiance

to Vitellius, the audience cheered Vitellius. The populace decked all the busts

of Galba with laurel-leaves and flowers, and carried them round from temple

to temple. The garlands were eventually piled up into a sort of tomb near

Lake Curtius, on the spot which Galba had stained with his life-blood. In the

senate the distinctions devised during the long reigns of other emperors were

all conferred on Vitellius at once. To these was added a vote of thanks and

congratulation  to  the  German  army,  and  a  deputation  was  dispatched  to

express the senate's satisfaction. Letters were read which Fabius Valens had

addressed to the consuls in very moderate terms. But Caecina's moderation

was still more gratifying: he had not written at all.

 
However, Italy found peace a more ghastly burden than the war. Vitellius'

soldiers scattered through all the boroughs and colonial towns, indulging in

plunder,  violence,  and  rape.  Impelled  by  their  greed  or  the  promise  of

payment, they cared nothing for right and wrong: kept their hands off nothing

sacred or profane. Even civilians put on uniform and seized the opportunity

to murder their enemies. The soldiers themselves, knowing the countryside

well,  marked  down  the  richest  fields  and  wealthiest  houses  for  plunder,

determined to murder any one who offered resistance. Their generals were

too much in their debt to venture any opposition. Of the two Caecina showed

less greed and more ambition. Valens had earned a bad name by his own ill-

gotten  gains,  and  was  therefore  bound  to  shut  his  eyes  to  others'

shortcomings.  The  resources  of  Italy  had  long  been  exhausted;  all  these

thousands of infantry and cavalry, all this violence and damage and outrage

was almost more than the country could bear.

 
Meanwhile Vitellius knew nothing of his victory. With the remainder of his

German army he continued to advance as though the war had just begun. A

few of the veterans were left in winter quarters, and troops were hurriedly

enlisted in the Gallic provinces, to fill up the vacancies in what were now

mere skeleton legions. Leaving Hordeonius Flaccus to guard the line of the

Rhine, Vitellius advanced with a picked detachment from the army in Britain,

eight  thousand  strong.  After  a  few  days'  march  he  received  news  of  the

victory of Bedriacum and the collapse of the war on the death of Otho. He

summoned a meeting and heaped praise on the courage of the troops. When

the army demanded that he should confer equestrian rank on his freedman

Asiaticus,  he  checked  their  shameful  flattery.  Then  with  characteristicinstability he granted at a private banquet what he had refused in public. This

Asiaticus,  who  was  thus  decorated  with  the  gold  ring,  was  an  infamous

menial who rose by his vices.

 
During  these  same  days  news  arrived  that  Albinus,  the  Governor  of

Mauretania,  had  been  murdered,  and  both  provinces  had  declared  for

Vitellius.  Appointed  by  Nero  to  the  province  of  Mauretania  Caesariensis,

Lucceius  Albinus  had  further  received  from  Galba  the  governorship  of

Tingitana,  and  thus  commanded  a  very  considerable  force,  consisting  of

nineteen cohorts of infantry, five regiments of horse, and an immense horde

of Moors, well trained for war by their practice in plunder. After Galba's

murder he inclined to Otho's side and, not contented with the province of

Africa, began to threaten Spain on the other side of the narrow strait. Cluvius

Rufus, alarmed at this, moved the Tenth legion down to the coast as though

for transport. He also sent some centurions ahead to gain the sympathies of

the Moors for Vitellius. The great reputation of the German army throughout

the provinces facilitated this task, and they also spread a rumour that Albinus

was not contented with the title of 'Governor', and wanted to adopt a regal

style under the name of Juba. So the sympathies of the army shifted.

 
Asinius Pollio, who commanded the local cavalry, one of Albinus' most loyal

friends, was assassinated. The same fate befell Festus and Scipio, who were

in command of the infantry. Albinus himself embarked from Tingitana for

Caesariensis,  and  was  murdered  as  he  landed.  His  wife  confronted  the

assassins  and  was  murdered  too.  How  all  this  happened  Vitellius  never

inquired. He passed by events of the highest importance after a few moments'

attention, being quite unable to cope with serious matters.

 
On reaching the Arar, Vitellius ordered his army to march overland while he

sailed down the river. Travelling with no imperial state, he had nothing but

his original poverty to make him conspicuous, until Junius Blaesus, Governor

of  the  Lyons  division  of  Gaul,  a  member  of  an  eminent  family,  whose

liberality matched his wealth, provided the emperor with a staff and escorted

him  in  person  with  great  courtesy,  an  attention  which  proved  most

unwelcome  to  Vitellius,  although  he  concealed  his  annoyance  under  the

grossest flattery. At Lugdunum he found the generals of both parties awaiting

him. Valens and Caecina were openly commended at a public meeting, and

given places on either side of the emperor's throne. He then sent the wholearmy to fetch his infant son, and when they brought him wearing a general's

uniform, Vitellius took him up in his arms and named him Germanicus, at the

same time decorating him with all the insignia of his imperial position. The

exaggerated honours of these days proved the child's only consolation for the

evil times which followed.

 
The most energetic of Otho's centurions were now executed, which did more

than anything else to alienate the armies of Illyricum. The other legions also

caught  the  infection,  and  their  dislike  of  the  German  troops  made  them

harbour thoughts of war. Suetonius Paulinus and Licinius Proculus were kept

in mourning and suspense, disheartened by delay. When at last their case was

heard, their pleas savoured more of necessity than honour. They positively

claimed credit for treachery, alleging that the long march before the battle,

the fatigue of their troops, and the confusion created by the wagons in their

lines were all due not to chance, but to their own treachery. Vitellius believed

their protestations of treason, and acquitted them of all suspicion of loyalty.

 
Otho's  brother,  Salvius  Titianus,  was  in  no  danger.  His  affection  for  his

brother  and  his  personal  inefficiency  excused  him.  Marius  Celsus  was

allowed to hold his consulship. But rumour gave rise to a belief which led to

an  attack  being  made  in  the  senate  against  Caecilius  Simplex,  who  was

charged  with  trying  to  purchase  the  consulship  and  to  secure  Celsus'

destruction. Vitellius, however, refused this, and afterwards allowed Simplex

to  hold  the  consulship  without  detriment  to  his  conscience  or  his  purse.

Trachalus was protected against his accusers by Galeria, Vitellius' wife.

 
With so many of the great in danger of their lives, an obscure creature called

Mariccus, of the tribe of the Boii—it is a sordid incident—endeavoured to

thrust himself into greatness and to challenge the armies of Rome, pretending

to be a minister of Heaven. This divine champion of the Gauls, as he had

entitled himself, had already gathered a force of eight thousand men, and

began making overtures to the neighbouring Aeduan villages. But the chief

community of the Aedui wisely sent out a picked force, with some Vitellian

troops in support, and scattered the mob of fanatics. Mariccus was captured

in the engagement, and later thrown to wild beasts. As they refused to devour

him, the common people stupidly believed him invulnerable, until he was

executed in the presence of Vitellius.

 No further measures were taken against the life or property of the rebels. The

estates of those who had fallen fighting for Otho were allowed to devolve by

will or else by the law of intestate succession. Indeed, if Vitellius had set

limits to his luxury, there was no need to fear his greed for money. It was his

foul and insatiable gluttony. Rome and Italy were scoured for dainties to

tickle his palate: from shore to shore the high roads rang with the traffic. The

leading provincials were ruined by having to provide for his table. The very

towns were impoverished. Meanwhile the soldiers were acquiring luxurious

habits, learning to despise their general, and gradually losing their former

efficiency and courage.

 
Vitellius  sent  a  manifesto  on  to  Rome  in  which  he  declined  the  title  of

Caesar,  and  postponed  calling  himself  Augustus  without  giving  up  any

portion of his power. All astrologers were exiled from Italy, and rigorous

provision was made to restrain Roman knights from the disgrace of appearing

at  the  games  in  the  arena.  Former  emperors  had  paid,  or  more  often

compelled them to do this, and many of the provincial towns vied together in

hiring the most profligate young aristocrats.

 
The arrival of his brother and the growing influence of his tutors in tyranny

made  Vitellius  daily  more  haughty  and  cruel.  He  gave  orders  for  the

execution of Dolabella, whom Otho, as we have seen, had relegated to the

colonial town of Aquinum. On hearing of Otho's death, he had ventured back

to  Rome.  Whereupon  an  ex-praetor,  named  Plancius  Varus,  one  of

Dolabella's closest friends, laid information before the city prefect, Flavius

Sabinus, maintaining that he had broken from custody to put himself at the

head of the defeated party. He added that Dolabella had tried to tamper with

the cohort stationed at Ostia. Having no proof of these very serious charges,

he repented and begged for his friend's forgiveness. But it was too late. The

crime was committed. While Flavius Sabinus was hesitating what to do in

such  a  serious  matter,  Lucius  Vitellius'  wife,  Triaria,  whose  cruelty  was

altogether unwomanly, terrified him by suggesting that he was trying to get a

reputation  for  mercy  at  the  expense  of  his  emperor's  safety.  Sabinus  was

naturally of a kindly disposition, but easily changed under the influence of

fear. Though it was not he who was in danger, he was full of alarms, and

hastened  Dolabella's  impending  ruin  for  fear  of  being  supposed  to  have

helped him.

 Vitellius,  accordingly,  from  motives  both  of  suspicion  and  of  hatred

(Dolabella had married his divorced wife Petronia), summoned Dolabella by

letter to avoid the crowded thoroughfare of the Flaminian road and to turn off

to Interamnium, where he gave orders for his murder. The assassin found the

journey tedious; discovered his victim sleeping on the floor at a wayside inn,

and cut his throat. This gave the new government a very bad name. People

took it as a specimen of what to expect. Triaria's shameless behaviour was

further emphasized by the exemplary behaviour of her relative Galeria, the

emperor's wife, who kept clear of these dreadful doings. Equally admirable

was the character of his mother, Sextilia, a woman of the old school. It was

even on record that when her son's first letters were read to her, she said, 'It

was no Germanicus, but a Vitellius that I brought into the world.' From that

time neither the attractions of her high station nor the unanimous flattery of

Rome could win her over to complacence. She only shared the sorrows of her

house.

 
When  Vitellius  left  Lugdunum,  Cluvius  Rufus  relinquished  his  Spanish

province and followed him. He knew that serious charges had been made

against  him,  and  his  smiling  congratulations  hid  an  anxious  heart.  A

freedman of the imperial court, Hilarus by name, had given evidence against

him,  alleging  that,  when  Cluvius  heard  of  the  rival  claims  of  Otho  and

Vitellius, he had endeavoured to set up an independent authority of his own

in Spain, and to this end had issued passports with no emperor's name at the

head. Certain phrases in his speeches were also construed as damaging to

Vitellius and as a bid for his own popularity. However, Cluvius' influence

carried the day, and Vitellius even had his own freedman punished. Cluvius

was  given  a  place  at  court,  while  still  retaining  Spain,  of  which  he  was

absentee governor, following the precedent of Lucius Arruntius. In his case,

however,  Tiberius'  motive  had  been  suspicion,  whereas  Vitellius  detained

Cluvius without any such qualms. Trebellius Maximus was not allowed the

same privilege. He had fled from Britain to escape the fury of his troops.

Vettius Bolanus, who was then about the court, was sent out to take his place.

 
The  soldiers  of  the  defeated  legions  still  gave  Vitellius  a  good  deal  of

anxiety. Their spirit was by no means broken. They distributed themselves all

over  Italy,  mingling  with  the  victors  and  talking  treason.  The  most

uncompromising  of  all  were  the  Fourteenth,  who  refused  to  acknowledge

their defeat. At Bedriacum, they argued, it was only a detachment that hadbeen beaten, the main strength of the legion was not present. It was decided

to  send  them  back  to  Britain,  whence  Nero  had  summoned  them,  and

meanwhile  they  were  to  share  their  quarters  with  the  Batavian  irregulars,

because  of  the  long-standing  feud  between  them.  Quartered  as  they  were

under arms, their mutual hatred soon broke out into disorder.

 
At Turin one of the Batavians was cursing a workman for having cheated

him, when a legionary, who lodged with the workman, took his part. Each

quickly gathered his fellow soldiers round him, and from abuse they came to

bloodshed.  Indeed,  a  fierce  battle  would  have  broken  out,  unless  two

regiments  of  Guards  had  sided  with  the  Fourteenth,  thus  giving  them

confidence  and  frightening  the  Batavians.  Vitellius  gave  orders  that  the

Batavians  should  be  drafted  into  his  army,  while  the  legion  was  to  be

marched over the Graian Alps by a détour which would avoid Vienne. Its

inhabitants were another cause for alarm. On the night on which the legion

started they left fires burning all over Turin, and part of the town was burnt

down. This disaster, like so many others in the civil war, has been obliterated

by  the  greater  calamities  which  befell  other  cities.  No  sooner  were  the

Fourteenth across the Alps than the most mutinous spirits started off to march

for Vienne, but they were stopped by the unanimous interference of the better

men, and the legion was shipped across to Britain.

 
Vitellius' next cause of anxiety was the Guards. At first they were quartered

apart, and then, appeased by an honourable discharge, they gave up their

arms  to  their  officers.  But  when  the  news  went  round  of  the  war  with

Vespasian, they enlisted again and formed the main strength of the Flavian

party. The First legion of marines was sent to Spain to cultivate docility in

peace and quiet. The Eleventh and the Seventh were sent back to their winter

quarters. The Thirteenth were set to work to build amphitheatres. For Caecina

at Cremona and Valens at Bononia were each preparing to give a gladiatorial

show. Vitellius never let his anxieties interfere with his pleasures.

 
The losing party being thus dispersed by peaceful means, disorder broke out

in  the  victorious  camp.  It  originated  in  sport,  but  the  number  of  deaths

increased the feeling against Vitellius. He had invited Verginius to dine with

him at Ticinum, and they had just sat down to table. The conduct of officers

is always determined by the behaviour of their generals; it depends on that

whether they adopt the simple life or indulge their taste for riotous living; thisagain  determines  whether  the  troops  are  smart  or  disorderly.  In  Vitellius'

army disorder and drunkenness were universal: it was more like a midnight

orgy  than  a  properly  disciplined  camp.  So  it  happened  that  two  of  the

soldiers, one belonging to the Fifth legion, the other to the Gallic auxiliaries,

in a drunken frolic challenged each other to wrestle. The legionary fell; and

when the Gaul began to exult over him, the soldiers who had gathered round

took  sides,  and  the  legionaries,  breaking  out  against  the  auxiliaries  with

murderous intent, actually cut to pieces a couple of cohorts. This commotion

was only cured by another. A cloud of dust and the glitter of arms appeared

on the horizon. Suddenly a cry arose that the Fourteenth had turned back and

were marching on them. However, it was their own rear-guard bringing up

the stragglers. This discovery quieted their alarm. Meanwhile, coming across

one  of  Verginius'  slaves,  they  charged  him  with  intending  to  assassinate

Vitellius, and rushed off to the banquet clamouring for Verginius' head. No

one really doubted his innocence, not even Vitellius, who always quailed at a

breath of suspicion. Yet, though it was the death of an ex-consul, their own

former general, which they demanded, it was with difficulty that they were

quieted. No one was a target for these outbreaks so often as Verginius. He

still retained the admiration and esteem of the men, but they hated him for

disdaining their offer.

 
On the next day Vitellius granted an audience to the deputation of the senate,

which he had told to await him at Ticinum. He then entered the camp and

spontaneously complimented the troops on their devotion to him. This made

the auxiliaries grumble at the growing licence and impunity allowed to the

legions. So the Batavians, for fear of some desperate outbreak, were sent

back to Germany, where Fortune was contriving for us a war that was at once

both  civil  and  foreign.  The  Gallic  auxiliaries  were  also  sent  home.  Their

numbers  were  very  large,  and  had  been  used  at  the  first  outbreak  of  the

rebellion for an empty parade of force. Indeed, the imperial finances were

already embarrassed by the distribution of largess, to meet the expenses of

which  Vitellius  gave  orders  for  depleting  the  strength  of  the  legions  and

auxiliaries.  Recruiting  was  forbidden,  and  discharges  offered  without

restriction. This policy was disastrous for the country and unpopular among

the soldiers, who found that their turn for work and danger came round all the

more frequently, now that there were so few to share the duties. Besides, their

efficiency was demoralized by luxury. Nothing was left of the old-fashioneddiscipline and the good rules of our ancestors, who preferred to base the

security of Rome on character and not on money.

 
Leaving  Ticinum  Vitellius  turned  off  to  Cremona.  There  he  witnessed

Caecina's games and conceived a wish to stand upon the field of Bedriacum,

and to see the traces of the recent victory with his own eyes. Within six

weeks of the battle, it was a disgusting and horrible sight; mangled bodies,

mutilated limbs, rotting carcasses of men and horses, the ground foul with

clotted  blood.  Trees  and  crops  all  trampled  down:  the  country-side  a

miserable waste. No less revolting to all human feeling was the stretch of

road which the people of Cremona had strewn with laurel-leaves and roses,

erecting altars and sacrificing victims as if in honour of an Oriental despot.

The rejoicings of the moment soon turned to their destruction. Valens and

Caecina were in attendance and showed Vitellius over the battle-field: this

was where their legions had charged: the cavalry took the field from here:

this was where the auxiliaries were outflanked. The various officers each

praised their own exploits, adding a few false or, at any rate, exaggerated

touches. The common soldiers, too, turned gaily shouting from the high road

to inspect the scene of their great struggle, gazing with wonder at the huge

pile of arms and heaps of bodies. There were a few who reflected with tears

of pity on the shifting chances of life. But Vitellius never took his eyes off

the  field:  never  shuddered  at  the  sight  of  all  these  thousands  of  Roman

citizens  lying  unburied.  On  the  contrary,  he  was  very  well  pleased,  and,

unconscious of his own impending doom, he offered a sacrifice to the local

deities.

 
They next came to Bononia, where Fabius Valens gave a gladiatorial show,

for which he had all the apparatus brought from Rome. The nearer they drew

to the city, the greater became the disorder of the march, which was now

joined by troops of actors, eunuchs and the like, all in the true spirit of Nero's

court. For Vitellius always had a great personal admiration for Nero. He used

to follow him about to hear him sing, not under compulsion—many a decent

man suffered that fate—but because he was the slave of his stomach, and had

sold himself to luxury.

 
To secure a few months of office for Valens and Caecina, the other consuls of

the year had their terms shortened, while Martius Macer's claim was ignored

as belonging to Otho's party. Valerius Marinus, who had been nominated byGalba, had his term postponed, not for any offence, but because he was a

mild creature and too lazy to resent an injury. The name of Pedanius Costa

was omitted altogether. Vitellius had never forgiven him for rising against

Nero and instigating Verginius. However, he alleged other reasons. They all

had  to  observe  the  servile  custom  of  the  time,  and  offer  their  thanks  to

Vitellius.

 
An imposture, received at first with great excitement, failed to last more than

a few days. A man had appeared who gave out that he was Scribonianus

Camerinus, and that during Nero's reign he had taken refuge in Histria, where

the Crassi still had their old connexions and estates, and their name was much

respected. He accordingly took all the rascals he could find and cast them for

parts. The credulous mob and some of the soldiers, who were either victims

of the imposture or anxious for a riot, eagerly flocked to join him. However,

he was taken before Vitellius and his identity examined. When it was found

that there was no truth in his pretensions, and that his master recognized him

as a runaway called Geta, he suffered the execution of a slave.

 
 

 
                              The Revolt of Vespasian

 
 

 
When once his couriers brought news from Syria and Judaea that the East had

sworn  allegiance  to  him,  Vitellius'  vanity  and  indolence  reached  a  pitch

which is almost incredible. For already, though the rumours were still vague

and unreliable, Vespasian's name was in everybody's mouth, and the mention

of him often roused Vitellius to alarm. Still, he and his army seemed to reck

of no rival: they at once broke out into the unbridled cruelty, debauchery and

oppression of some outlandish court.

 
Vespasian,  on  the  other  hand,  was  meditating  war  and  reckoning  all  his

forces both distant and near at hand. He had so much attached his troops to

himself, that when he dictated to them the oath of allegiance and prayed that

'all might be well' with Vitellius, they listened in silence. Mucianus' feelings

were not hostile to him, and were strongly sympathetic to Titus. Tiberius

Alexander, the Governor of Egypt, had made common cause with him. The

Third legion, since it had crossed from Syria into Moesia, he could reckon ashis own, and there was good hope that the other legions of Illyria would

follow its lead. The whole army, indeed, was incensed at the arrogance of

Vitellius' soldiers: truculent in appearance and rough of tongue, they scoffed

at all the other troops as their inferiors. But a war of such magnitude demands

delay.  High  as  were  his  hopes,  Vespasian  often  calculated  his  risks.  He

realized that it would be a critical day for him when he committed his sixty

summers  and  his  two  young  sons  to  the  chances  of  war.  In  his  private

ambitions a man may feel his way and take less or more from fortune's hands

according  as  he  feels  inclined,  but  when  one  covets  a  throne  there  is  no

alternative between the zenith of success and headlong ruin.

 
Moreover, he always kept in view the strength of the German army, which, as

a soldier, he realized. His own legions, he knew, had no experience of civil

war, while Vitellius' troops were fresh from victory: and the defeated party

were  richer  in  grievances  than  in  troops.  Civil  strife  had  undermined  the

loyalty of the troops: there was danger in each single man. What would be the

good of all his horse and foot, if one or two traitors should seek the reward

the  enemy  offered  and  assassinate  him  then  and  there?  It  was  thus  that

Scribonianus  had  been  killed  in  Claudius'  reign,  and  his  murderer,

Volaginius, raised from a common soldier to the highest rank. It is easier to

move men in the mass than to take precautions against them singly.

 
These anxieties made Vespasian hesitate. Meanwhile the other generals and

his friends continued to encourage him. At last Mucianus after several private

interviews went so far as to address him in public. 'Everybody,' he said, 'who

plans some great exploit is bound to consider whether his enterprise serves

both  the  public  interest  and  his  own  reputation,  and  whether  it  is  easily

practicable or, at any rate, not impossible. He must also weigh the advice

which he gets. Are those who offer it ready to run the risk themselves? And,

if fortune favours, who gains the glory? I myself, Vespasian, call you to the

throne. How much that may benefit the country and make you famous it lies

with you—under Providence—to decide. You need not be afraid that I may

seem to flatter you. It is more of an insult than a compliment to be chosen to

succeed  Vitellius.  It  is  not  against  the  powerful  intellect  of  the  sainted

Augustus that we are in revolt; not against the cautious prudence of the old

Tiberius;  nor  even  against  a  long-established  imperial  family  like  that  of

Caligula, Claudius or Nero. You even gave way to Galba's ancient lineage.

To remain inactive any longer, to leave your country to ruin and disgrace,that would be sheer sloth and cowardice, even if such slavery were as safe for

you as it would be dishonourable. The time is long past when you could be

merely suspected of ambition: the throne is now your only refuge. Have you

forgotten Corbulo's murder? He was a man of better family than we, I admit,

but so was Nero more nobly born than Vitellius. A man who is feared always

seems illustrious enough to those who fear him. That an army can make an

emperor Vitellius himself has proved. He had neither experience nor military

reputation, but merely rose on Galba's unpopularity. Even Otho fell not by

the strategy or strength of his opponent, but by his own precipitate despair.

And  to-day  he  seems  a  great  and  desirable  emperor,  when  Vitellius  is

disbanding his legions, disarming his Guards, and daily sowing fresh seeds of

civil  war.  Why,  any  spirit  or  enthusiasm  which  his  army  had  is  being

dissipated in drunken debauches: for they imitate their master. But you, in

Judaea,  in  Syria,  in  Egypt,  you  have  nine  fresh  legions.  War  has  not

weakened nor mutiny demoralized them. The men are trained to discipline

and  have  already  won  a  foreign  war.  Besides  these,  you  can  rely  on  the

strength of your fleet, and of your auxiliaries both horse and foot, on the

faithful  allegiance  of  foreign  princes,  and  on  your  own  unparalleled

experience.

 
'For  ourselves  I  make  but  one  claim.  Let  us  not  rank  below  Valens  and

Caecina. Nor must you despise my help because you do not encounter my

rivalry.  I  prefer  myself  to  Vitellius  and  you  to  myself.  Your  house  has

received the insignia of a triumph. You have two young sons, one of whom is

already old enough to fill the throne, and in his first years of service made a

name for himself in the German army. It would be absurd for me not to give

way to one whose son I should adopt, were I emperor myself. Apart from

this, we shall stand on a different footing in success and in failure, for if we

succeed I shall have such honour as you grant me: of the risk and the dangers

we shall share the burden equally. Or rather, do what is better still. Dispose

your  armies  yourself  and  leave  me  the  conduct  of  the  war,  and  the

uncertainties of battle.

 
'At  this  moment  the  defeated  are  far  more  strictly  disciplined  than  their

conquerors. Indignation, hatred, the passion for revenge, all serve to steel our

courage. Theirs is dulled by pride and mutiny. The course of the war will

soon bring to light the hidden weakness of their party, and reopen all its

festering sores. I rely on your vigilance, your economy, your wisdom, andstill more on the indolence, ignorance, and cruelty of Vitellius. Above all, our

cause is far safer in war than in peace, for those who plan rebellion have

rebelled already.'

 
At  the  end  of  Mucianus'  speech  the  others  all  pressed  round  with  new

confidence,  offering  their  encouragement  and  quoting  the  answers  of

soothsayers and the movements of the stars. Nor was Vespasian uninfluenced

by superstition. In later days, when he was master of the world, he made no

secret of keeping a soothsayer called Seleucus to help him by his advice and

prophecy. Early omens began to recur to his memory. A tall and conspicuous

cypress on his estate had once suddenly collapsed: on the next day it had

risen  again  on  the  same  spot  to  grow  taller  and  broader  than  ever.  The

soothsayers had agreed that this was an omen of great success, and augured

the height of fame for the still youthful Vespasian. At first his triumphal

honours, his consulship, and the name he won by his Jewish victory seemed

to have fulfilled the promise of this omen. But having achieved all this, he

began to believe that it portended his rise to the throne.

 
On the frontier of Judaea and Syria lies a hill called Carmel. A god of the

same name is there worshipped according to ancient ritual. There is no image

or temple: only an altar where they reverently worship. Once when Vespasian

was  sacrificing  on  this  altar,  brooding  on  his  secret  ambition,  the  priest,

Basilides, after a minute inspection of the omens said to him: 'Whatever it is

which you have in mind, Vespasian, whether it is to build a house or to

enlarge your estate, or to increase the number of your slaves, there is granted

to you a great habitation, vast acres, and a multitude of men.' Rumour had

immediately seized on this riddle and now began to solve it. Nothing was

more talked of, especially in Vespasian's presence: such conversation is the

food of hope. Having come to a definite decision they departed, Mucianus to

Antioch, Vespasian to Caesarea. The former is the capital of Syria, the latter

of Judaea.

 
The first offer of the throne to Vespasian was made at Alexandria, where

Tiberius  Alexander  with  great  promptitude  administered  the  oath  of

allegiance to his troops on the first of July. This was usually celebrated as his

day of accession, although it was not until the third that the Jewish army took

the oath in his presence. So eager was their enthusiasm that they would not

even wait for the arrival of Titus, who was on his way back from Syria,where  he  had  been  conducting  the  negotiations  between  his  father  and

Mucianus.

 
What happened was all due to the impulse of the soldiers: there was no set

speech, no formal assembly of the troops. They were still discussing the time

and the place, and trying to decide the hardest point of all, who should speak

first, and while their minds were still busy with hopes and fears, reasons and

chances,  Vespasian  happened  to  come  out  of  his  quarters.  A  few  of  the

soldiers, forming up in the usual way to salute their general, saluted him as

emperor. The others promptly rushed up calling him Caesar and Augustus,

and heaping on him all the imperial titles. Their fears at once gave way to

confidence. Vespasian himself, unchanged by the change of fortune, showed

no  sign  of  vanity  or  arrogance.  As  soon  as  he  had  recovered  from  the

dazzling shock of his sudden elevation, he addressed them in simple soldier

fashion,  and  received  a  shower  of  congratulations  from  every  quarter.

Mucianus, who had been waiting for this, administered the oath of allegiance

to his eager troops, and then entered the theatre at Antioch, where the Greeks

ordinarily hold their debates. There, as the fawning crowd came flocking in,

he addressed them in their own tongue. For he could speak elegant Greek,

and had the art of making the most of all he said or did. What most served to

inflame the excitement of the province and of the army, was his statement

that  Vitellius  had  determined  to  transfer  the  German  legions  to  peaceful

service in the rich province of Syria, and to send the Syrian legions to endure

the toil and rigours of a winter in Germany. The provincials were accustomed

to the soldiers' company and liked to have them quartered there, and many

were bound to them by ties of intimacy and kinship, while the soldiers in

their long term of service had come to know and love their old camp like a

home.

 
Before the 15th of July the whole of Syria had sworn allegiance. The party

also gained the support of Sohaemus, with all the resources of his kingdom

and a considerable force, and of Antiochus, the richest of the subject princes,

who owed his importance to his ancestral treasures. Before long Agrippa, too,

received  a  secret  summons  from  his  friends  at  home,  and  leaving  Rome

without  the  knowledge  of  Vitellius,  sailed  as  fast  as  he  could  to  join

Vespasian. His sister Berenice showed equal enthusiasm for the cause. She

was then in the flower of her youth and beauty, and her munificent gifts to

Vespasian  quite  won  the  old  man's  heart.  Indeed,  every  province  on  theseaboard as far as Asia and Achaia, and inland to Pontus and Armenia swore

allegiance to Vespasian, but their governors were without troops, for as yet

no legions had been assigned to Cappadocia.

 
A meeting was held at Berytus to discuss the general situation. To this came

Mucianus with all his officers and the most distinguished of his centurions

and soldiers, besides the elite of the Jewish army in full uniform. All these

cavalry and infantry, and the pageant of the subject princes, vying with each

other in splendour, gave the meeting an air of imperial grandeur.

 
The  first  step  was  to  levy  new  troops  and  to  recall  the  veterans  to  the

standards. Some of the strongest towns were told off to manufacture arms.

New gold and silver were coined at Antioch. All these works were promptly

carried out, each in the proper place, by competent officials. Vespasian came

and  inspected  them  himself,  encouraging  good  work  by  his  praises  and

rousing  the  inefficient  rather  by  example  than  compulsion,  always  more

ready to see the merits than the faults of his friends. Many were rewarded by

receiving commands in the auxiliary forces or posts as imperial agents. Still

more were raised to senatorial rank. They were mostly men of distinction

who soon rose high, and with others success atoned for any lack of merit. A

donation for the troops had been mentioned by Mucianus in his first speech,

but in very guarded terms. Even Vespasian offered for the civil war a lower

figure  than  others  gave  in  time  of  peace,  for  he  had  set  his  face  with

admirable firmness against largess to the soldiers, and his army was none the

worse for it. Envoys were dispatched to Parthia and Armenia to secure that

the legions, while engaged in the civil war, should not be exposed to attack in

the rear. It was arranged that Titus should carry on the war in Judaea, while

Vespasian held the keys of Egypt. Against Vitellius it seemed sufficient to

send a part of their forces under the command of Mucianus. He would have

Vespasian's name behind him and the irresistible force of destiny. Letters

were written to all the armies and their generals with instructions that they

should try to win over those of the Guards who were hostile to Vitellius by

promising them renewal of service.

 
Meanwhile,  Mucianus,  who  acted  the  part  more  of  a  partner  than  a

subordinate, moved forward without the encumbrance of baggage, neither

marching so slowly as to look like holding back, nor so rapidly as not to

allow time for rumours to spread. He realized that his force was small, andthat the less people saw the more they would believe of it. However, he had a

solid column following in support, composed of the Sixth legion and some

picked detachments numbering 13,000 men. He had ordered the fleet to move

from Pontus to Byzantium, for he was half-minded to leave Moesia and with

his  whole  force  to  hold  Dyrrachium,  at  the  same  time  using  his  fleet  to

dominate the Italian sea. He would thus secure Greece and Asia in his rear,

which would otherwise be at the mercy of Vitellius, unless furnished with

troops. Vitellius also would himself be in doubt what points of the Italian

coast to defend, if Mucianus with his ships threatened both Brundisium and

Tarentum and the whole coastline of Calabria and Lucania.

 
Thus the provinces rang from end to end with the preparations for ships,

soldiers and arms. But the heaviest burden was the raising of money. 'Funds,'

said Mucianus, 'are the sinews of war,' and in his investigations he cared for

neither justice nor equity, but solely for the amount of the sum. Informers

abounded, and pounced on every rich man as their prey. This intolerable

oppression, excused by the necessities of war, was allowed to continue even

in peace. It was not so much that Vespasian at the beginning of his reign had

made up his mind to maintain unjust decisions, but fortune spoilt him; he had

learnt in a bad school and made a bold use of his lessons. Mucianus also

contributed from his private means, of which he was generous, as he hoped to

get a high rate of interest out of the country. Others followed his example, but

very few had his opportunity of recovering their money.

 
In the meantime Vespasian's progress was accelerated by the enthusiasm with

which the Illyrian army espoused his cause. The Third set the example to the

other legions of Moesia, the Eighth and the Seventh Claudian, both strongly

attached to Otho, although they had not been present at the battle. On their

arrival at Aquileia they had mobbed the couriers who brought the news of

Otho's fall, and torn to pieces the standards bearing Vitellius' name, finally

looting the camp-chest and dividing the money among themselves. These

were hostile acts. Alarmed at what they had done they began to reflect that,

while their conduct needed excuse before Vitellius, they could make a merit

of  it  with  Vespasian.  Accordingly,  the  three  Moesian  legions  addressed

letters  to  the  Pannonian  army,  inviting  their  co-operation,  and  meanwhile

prepared to meet refusal with force.

 
Aponius Saturninus, the Governor of Moesia, took this opportunity to attemptan abominable crime. He sent a centurion to murder Tettius Julianus, who

commanded the Seventh legion, alleging the interests of his party as a cloak

for a personal quarrel. Julianus heard of his danger and, taking some guides

who knew the country, escaped into the wilds of Moesia and got as far as

Mount Haemus. After that he meddled no more in civil war. Starting to join

Vespasian,  he  prolonged  his  journey  by  various  expedients,  retarding  or

hastening his pace according to the nature of the news he received.

 
In Pannonia the Thirteenth legion and the Seventh Galbian had not forgotten

their  feelings  after  the  battle  of  Bedriacum.  They  lost  no  time  in  joining

Vespasian's cause, being chiefly instigated by Antonius Primus. This man

was a criminal who had been convicted of fraud during Nero's reign. Among

the many evils of the war was his recovery of senatorial rank. Galba gave him

command  of  the  Seventh  legion,  and  he  was  believed  to  have  written

repeatedly to Otho offering his services as general to the party. But, as Otho

took  no  notice  of  him,  he  was  without  employment  in  the  war.  When

Vitellius'  cause  began  to  decline,  he  joined  Vespasian  and  proved  an

acquisition. He was a man of great physical energy and a ready tongue; an

artist in calumny, invaluable in riots and sedition. Light-fingered and free-

handed, he was intolerable in peace, but by no means contemptible in war.

The union of the Moesian and Pannonian armies soon attracted the troops in

Dalmatia to the cause. Tampius Flavianus and Pompeius Silvanus, the two

ex-consuls who governed respectively Pannonia and Dalmatia, were wealthy

old  gentlemen  who  had  no  thought  of  rising.  But  the  imperial  agent  in

Pannonia, Cornelius Fuscus, was a vigorous young man of good family. In

his early youth a desire to make money had led him to resign his senatorial

rank. He had headed the townsmen of his colony in declaring for Galba, and

his  services  had  won  him  a  position  as  imperial  agent.  Then  he  joined

Vespasian's party, giving a keen stimulus to the war; for, being attracted more

by danger itself than by its prizes, he always disliked what was certain and

long  established,  preferring  everything  that  was  new  and  dangerous  and

doubtful. So the Vespasian party used all their efforts to fan every spark of

discontent  throughout  the  empire.  Letters  were  sent  to  the  Fourteenth  in

Britain and to the First in Spain, since both these legions had stood for Otho

against  Vitellius.  In  Gaul,  too,  letters  were  scattered  broadcast.  All  in  an

instant the war was in full flame. The armies of Illyricum openly revolted,

and all the others were ready to follow the first sign of success. 
 

 
                                  Vitellius in Rome

 
 

 
While  Vespasian  and  his  generals  were  showing  such  activity  in  the

provinces, Vitellius grew more contemptible and indolent every day. Halting

at every town or country house that offered any attractions, he made his way

to  Rome  with  a  heavy  marching  column  of  sixty  thousand  troops,

demoralized by loose discipline, and an even greater number of menials as

well as those camp-followers who are more troublesome than any slaves.

Besides these he had the vast retinue of his generals and friends, which not

even the strictest discipline could have kept under control. This mob was

further encumbered by senators and knights, who came from Rome to meet

him,  some  from  fear,  some  from  servility;  and  gradually  all  the  others

followed, so as not to be left behind by themselves. There flocked in, too, a

crowd  of  low-bred  buffoons,  actors  and  chariot-drivers,  who  had  gained

Vitellius' acquaintance by various dishonest services. He delighted in such

discreditable connexions. To furnish supplies for this host not only were the

colonies and country towns laid under contribution, but the farmers as well.

The crops were just ripe and the fields were ravaged like an enemy's country.

 
Many murderous affrays took place among the soldiers, for after the mutiny

at  Ticinum  there  were  ceaseless  quarrels  between  the  legions  and  the

auxiliaries. They only united to harry the villagers. The worst bloodshed took

place at the seventh milestone from Rome. Here Vitellius had ready-cooked

food served to each of the soldiers, as is done with gladiators in training, and

the common people flocked out from Rome and wandered all over the camp.

Some of these visitors indulged in a cockney practical joke,

 
and stole some of the soldiers' swords, quietly cutting their belts while their

attention  was  diverted.  Then  they  kept  asking  them,  'Have  you  got  your

sword on?' The troops were not used to being laughed at, and refused to

tolerate it. They charged the defenceless crowd. Amongst others the father of

one  of  the  soldiers  was  killed  while  in  his  son's  company.  When  it  was

discovered who he was, and the news spread, they shed no more innocent

blood. Still there was some panic in the city as the first soldiers arrived andbegan to roam the streets. They mostly made for the Forum, anxious to see

the  spot  where  Galba  had  fallen.  They  themselves  were  a  sufficiently

alarming sight with their rough skin coats and long pikes. Unused to towns,

they failed to pick their way in the crowd; or they would slip on the greasy

streets, or collide with some one and tumble down, whereupon they took to

abuse and before long to violence. Their officers, too, terrified the city by

sweeping along the streets with their bands of armed men.

 
After crossing the Mulvian bridge, Vitellius himself had been riding on a

conspicuous horse, wearing his sword and general's uniform, with the senate

and people trooping in front of him. However, as this looked too much like

an entry into a captured city, his friends persuaded him to change into civilian

dress and walk on foot. At the head of his column were carried the eagles of

four legions, surrounded by the colours belonging to the detachments of four

other  legions.  Next  came  the  standards  of  twelve  regiments  of  auxiliary

horse, then the files of infantry and the cavalry behind them. Then came

thirty-four cohorts of auxiliaries, arranged according to their nationality or

the nature of their weapons. In front of the eagles came the camp prefects and

tribunes, and the senior centurions, all dressed in white. The other centurions

marched each at the head of his company, glittering with their armour and

decorations. Gaily, too, shone the soldiers' medals and their chains of honour.

It was a noble spectacle, an army worthy of a better emperor. Thus Vitellius

entered the Capitol, where he embraced his mother and conferred on her the

title of Augusta.

 
On the following day Vitellius delivered a grandiloquent eulogy on his own

merits. He might have been addressing the senate and people of some other

state,  for  he  extolled  his  own  industry  and  self-control,  although  each

member of his audience had seen his infamy for himself, and the whole of

Italy had witnessed during his march the shameful spectacle of his sloth and

luxury. However, the thoughtless crowd could not discriminate between truth

and falsehood. They had learnt the usual flatteries by heart and chimed in

with loud shouts of applause. They insisted in the face of his protests that he

should take the title of Augustus. But neither his refusal nor their insistence

made much difference.

 
In Rome nothing passes without comment, and it was regarded as a fatal

omen that Vitellius took office as high priest, and issued his encyclical onpublic worship on the 18th of July, which, as the anniversary of the disasters

on the Cremera and the Allia, had long been considered an unlucky day. But

his ignorance of all civil and religious precedent was only equalled by the

incapacity of his freedmen and friends. He seemed to live in a society of

drunkards. However, at the consular elections he canvassed for his candidates

like a common citizen. In everything he courted the favour of the lowest

classes, attending performances in the theatre and backing his favourite at the

races. This would undoubtedly have made him popular had his motives been

good, but the memory of his former life made his conduct seem cheap and

discreditable. He constantly attended the senate, even when the debates were

on trivial matters. It once happened that Helvidius Priscus, then praetor-elect,

opposed Vitellius' policy. At first the emperor showed annoyance, but was

content to appeal to the tribunes of the people to come to the rescue of his

slighted authority. Afterwards, when his friends, fearing that his resentment

might  be  deep-seated,  tried  to  smooth  matters,  he  replied  that  there  was

nothing strange in two senators disagreeing on a question of public policy: he

himself had often opposed even such a man as Thrasea. Most people laughed

at  the  impudence  of  this  comparison;  others  were  gratified  that  he  had

selected  Thrasea,  and  not  some  court  favourite,  as  an  example  of  real

distinction.

 
Vitellius had given the command of the Guards to Publilius Sabinus, who had

commanded an auxiliary cohort, and Julius Priscus, hitherto only a centurion.

Priscus owed his rise to Valens' support, Sabinus to that of Caecina. The

rivalry between Valens and Caecina left Vitellius no authority at all. They

managed  the  government  between  them.  They  had  long  felt  the  strain  of

mutual  dislike.  During  the  war  they  had  concealed  it.  Lately  it  had  been

fanned by dishonest friends and by life in the city, which so easily breeds

quarrels. They were constant rivals, comparing their respective popularity,

the number of their retinue, the size of the crowds that came to wait upon

them.

 
Meanwhile  Vitellius  let  his  favour  alternate  between  them,  for  personal

influence is not to be trusted beyond a certain limit. Meanwhile, they both

feared and despised the emperor himself, who thus veered between sudden

brusqueness and unseasonable flattery. However, they were not in the least

deterred  from  seizing  on  the  houses,  gardens,  and  funds  in  the  emperor's

patronage, while the crowd of miserable and needy nobles, whom Galba hadrecalled  from  exile  with  their  children,  derived  no  assistance  from  the

emperor's liberality. He earned the approval both of the upper classes and of

the people by granting to the restored full rights over their freedmen. But the

freed slaves with characteristic meanness did all they could to invalidate the

edict. They would hide their money with some obscure friend or in a rich

patron's  safe.  Some,  indeed,  had  passed  into  the  imperial  household  and

become more influential than their masters.

 
As for the soldiers, the Guards' barracks were crowded, and the overflow

spread  through  the  city,  finding  shelter  in  colonnades  and  temples.  They

ceased to recognize any head-quarters, to go on guard, or to keep themselves

in training, but fell victims to the attractions of city life and its unmentionable

vices, until they deteriorated both physically and morally through idleness

and debauchery. A number of them even imperilled their lives by settling in

the pestilent Vatican quarter, thus increasing the rate of mortality. They were

close to the Tiber, and the Germans and Gauls, who were peculiarly liable to

disease  and  could  ill  stand  the  heat,  ruined  their  constitutions  by  their

immoderate use of the river. Moreover, the generals, either for bribes or to

earn  popularity,  tampered  with  the  rules  of  the  service,  enrolling  sixteen

regiments  of  Guards  and  four  for  the  city  garrison,  each  composed  of  a

thousand  men.  In  enlisting  these  troops  Valens  put  himself  forward  as

superior to Caecina, whose life he claimed to have saved. It is true, indeed,

that his arrival had consolidated the party, and by his successful engagement

he had silenced the current criticism of their slow marching. Besides which

the whole of the army of Lower Germany was attached to Valens, and this is

said to be the reason why Caecina's loyalty first wavered.

 
Whatever indulgence Vitellius showed to his generals, he allowed still more

licence to the troops. Each man chose his service. However unfit, he might

enlist in the Guards, if he preferred it. On the other hand, good soldiers were

allowed, if they wished, to remain in the legions or the auxiliary cavalry.

Many wished to do this who suffered from ill health and complained of the

climate. However, the best soldiers were thus withdrawn from the legions and

from the cavalry; and the Guards were robbed of their prestige when twenty

thousand  men  were  thus  not  so  much  selected  for  service  with  them  as

drafted at random from the whole army.

 
While Vitellius was addressing the troops, they demanded the execution ofthree Gallic chieftains, Asiaticus, Flavus, and Rufinus, on the ground that

they had fought for Vindex. Vitellius never checked these outcries. For, apart

from the innate cowardice of his nature, he knew that his donation to the

soldiers was nearly due, and that he had no money for it; so he freely granted

all their other demands. The imperial freedmen were forced to contribute a

sort of tax, proportionate to the number of their slaves. Meanwhile, his one

serious  occupation  was  extravagance.  He  built  stables  for  chariot-drivers,

filled the arena with gorgeous shows of gladiators and wild beasts, and fooled

away his money as though he had more than he wanted. Moreover, Valens

and Caecina celebrated Vitellius' birthday by holding gladiatorial shows in

every  quarter  of  Rome  on  a  scale  of  magnificence  hitherto  unknown.

Vitellius  then  gratified  the  rabble  and  scandalized  all  decent  people  by

building altars in the Martian Plain, and holding a funeral service in honour

of Nero. Victims were killed and burnt in public: the torch was applied by the

Augustales, members of the college which Tiberius Caesar had founded in

honour of the Julian family, just as Romulus similarly commemorated King

Tatius.

 
It  was  not  yet  four  months  since  Vitellius'  victory,  and  yet  his  freedman

Asiaticus was as bad as a Polyclitus or a Patrobius, or any of the favourites

whose names were hated in earlier days. At this court no one strove to rise by

honesty or capacity. There was only one road to power. By lavish banquets,

costly profusion, and feats of gastronomy, you had to try and satisfy Vitellius'

insatiable gluttony. He himself, without thought for the morrow, was well

content to enjoy the present. It is believed that he squandered nine hundred

million sesterces in these brief months. Truly it shows Rome's greatness and

misfortune, that she endured Otho and Vitellius both in the same year, and

suffered  humiliation  of  every  kind  at  the  hands  of  men  like  Vinius  and

Fabius, Icelus and Asiaticus, until at last they gave way to Mucianus and

Marcellus—a change of men but not of manners.

 
The  first  news  of  rebellion  which  reached  Vitellius  came  from  Aponius

Saturninus,  who,  before  himself  going  over  to  Vespasian's  side,  wrote  to

announce the desertion of the Third legion. But a sudden crisis makes a man

nervous: Aponius did not tell the whole story. So the emperor's flattering

friends began to explain it all away: what was the defection of a single legion,

while the loyalty of the other armies remained unshaken? Vitellius himself

used the same language to the soldiers. He accused the men, who had beenrecently discharged from the Guards, of spreading false rumours, and kept

assuring them there was no fear of civil war. All mention of Vespasian was

suppressed,  and  soldiers  were  sent  round  the  city  to  frighten  people  into

silence, which, of course, did more than anything else to make them talk.

 
Vitellius, nevertheless, sent for reinforcements from Germany, Britain, and

the Spanish provinces, though with a lack of urgency which was intended to

conceal his straits. The provinces and their governors showed the same want

of enthusiasm. Hordeonius Flaccus, who had suspicions of the Batavi, was

distracted with a war of his own, while Vettius Bolanus never had Britain

under  complete  control:  nor  was  the  loyally  of  either  beyond  doubt.  The

Spanish provinces, where there was at the time no consular governor, were

equally slow. The three officers in command of the legions held an equal

authority, and if Vitellius' cause had prospered, would have each outbid the

other for his favour: but they all shared the resolve to leave his misfortunes

alone. In Africa the legion and auxiliaries enlisted by Clodius Macer, and

subsequently disbanded by Galba, took service again at Vitellius' orders, and

at the same time all the young men of the province eagerly enlisted. Vitellius

had been an honest and popular pro-consul in Africa, while Vespasian had

been distrusted and disliked. The provincials took this as an earnest of their

reigns; but experience proved them wrong.

 
The military legate Valerius Festus at first loyally seconded the enthusiasm of

the province. After a while he began to waver. In his official letters and edicts

he  still  acknowledged  Vitellius,  while  in  secret  communication  with

Vespasian and ready to support whichever party proved successful. In Raetia

and the Gallic provinces some centurions and men carrying letters and edicts

from Vespasian were taken prisoners and sent to Vitellius, who had them

executed.  But  most  of  these  envoys  escaped  capture  either  by  their  own

ingenuity  or  the  loyal  help  of  friends.  Thus,  while  Vitellius'  plans  were

known, Vespasian's were for the most part still a secret. This was partly due

to  Vitellius'  negligence,  but  also  to  the  fact  that  the  garrisons  on  the

Pannonian Alps stopped all messengers. By sea, too, the Etesian winds from

the north-west favoured ships sailing eastward, but hindered the voyage from

the East.

 
Terrified at last by the imminence of invasion and the alarming news that

reached him from all quarters, Vitellius instructed Caecina and Valens toprepare for war. Caecina was sent on ahead, Valens, who was just recovering

from  a  serious  illness,  being  delayed  by  his  weak  state  of  health.  Great,

indeed, was the change in the appearance of the German army as it marched

out  of  Rome.  There  was  neither  energy  in  their  muscles  nor  fire  in  their

hearts.  Slowly  the  column  straggled  on,  their  horses  spiritless,  their  arms

neglected. The men grumbled at the sun, the dust, the weather, and were as

ready to quarrel as they were unwilling to work. To these disadvantages were

added Caecina's inveterate self-seeking and his newly-acquired indolence. An

overdose of success had made him slack and self-indulgent, or, if he was

plotting treachery, this may have been one of his devices for demoralizing the

army.  It  has  often  been  believed  that  it  was  Flavius  Sabinus  who,  using

Rubrius Gallus as his agent, tampered with Caecina's loyalty by promising

that, if he came over, Vespasian would ratify any conditions. It may have

occurred also to Caecina to remember his quarrels and rivalry with Valens,

and to consider that, as he did not stand first with Vitellius, he had better

acquire credit and influence with the new emperor.

 
After  taking  an  affectionate  and  respectful  farewell  of  Vitellius,  Caecina

dispatched a body of cavalry to occupy Cremona. He soon followed with the

detachments of the First, Fourth, Fifteenth, and Sixteenth legions in the van.

The centre was composed of the Fifth and Twenty-second, and in the rear of

the column came the Twenty-first Rapax and the First Italian legion, with

detachments from the three legions of Britain and a select force of auxiliaries.

When Caecina had started, Valens wrote instructions to the legions belonging

to his old command to await him on the march, saying that he and Caecina

had arranged this. Caecina, however, took advantage of being on the spot,

and pretended that this plan had been altered so as to enable them to meet the

first  outbreak  of  the  war  with  their  full  strength.  So  some  legions  were

hurried forward to Cremona and part of the force was directed upon Hostilia.

Caecina himself turned aside to Ravenna on the pretext of giving instructions

to  the  fleet.  Thence  he  proceeded  to  Patavium  to  secure  secrecy  for  his

treacherous designs. For Lucilius Bassus, whom Vitellius, from a prefect of

auxiliary cavalry had raised to the supreme command of the two fleets at

Ravenna and Misenum, felt aggrieved at not being immediately given the

praefecture of the Guards, and sought in dastardly treachery the remedy for

his unjustifiable annoyance. It can never be known whether he influenced

Caecina or whether one was as dishonest as the other. There is seldom muchto choose between rascals.

 
The  historians  who  compiled  the  records  of  this  war  in  the  days  of  the

Flavian  dynasty  were  led  by  flattery  into  adducing  as  the  causes  of  the

rebellion patriotism and the interests of peace. We cannot think them right.

Apart from the innate disloyalty of the rebels and the loss of character after

Galba's betrayal, they seem to have been led by jealousy and rivalry into

sacrificing Vitellius himself for fear that they might lose the first place in his

favour.  Thus  when  Caecina  joined  his  army,  he  used  every  device  to

undermine the staunch fidelity of the centurions and soldiers to Vitellius.

Bassus found the same task less difficult, for the fleet remembered that they

had lately been in Otho's service, and were therefore already on the brink of

rebellion.

     

THE
HISTORIES:
BOOK Il
                                      BOOK III 
                                  Antonius' Advance

 
On the Flavian side the generals concerted their plans for the war with greater

loyalty and greater success. They had met at Poetovio at the head-quarters of

the Third legion, where they debated whether they should block the passage

of  the  Pannonian  Alps  and  wait  until  their  whole  strength  came  up  to

reinforce  them,  or  whether  they  should  take  a  bolder  line,  assume  the

offensive,  and  strike  for  Italy.  Those  who  were  in  favour  of  waiting  for

reinforcements and prolonging the war dwelt on the strength and reputation

of the German legions, and pointed out that the flower of the British army

had lately arrived in Rome with Vitellius; their own forces were numerically

inferior  and  had  recently  suffered  defeat;  moreover,  conquered  troops,

however bold their language, never show the same courage. On the other

hand, if they occupied the Alps, Mucianus would soon arrive with the forces

from the East. Besides, Vespasian still commanded the sea, and could count

on the support of the fleets and of the provinces, where he could still raise

material for a sort of second war. A salutary delay would bring them fresh

forces without in any way prejudicing their present position.

 
In answer to these arguments Antonius Primus, who had done more than any

one else to stir up the war, stoutly maintained that prompt action would save

them and ruin Vitellius. 'Their victory,' he said, 'has not served to inspirit but

to enervate them. The men are not held in readiness in camp, but are loitering

in towns all over Italy. No one but their hosts has any call to fear them. The

more unruly and ferocious they showed themselves before, the greater the

greed with which they now indulge in unwonted draughts of pleasure. The

circus, the theatre, and the charms of the capital have ruined their hardness

and their health. But if we give them time to train for war they will regain

their energy. It is not far to Germany, whence they draw their main strength.

Britain is only separated by a narrow channel. Close at hand they have Gaul

and  Spain,  from  the  provinces  of  which  they  can  get  men,  horses,  and

subsidies. Then again, they can rely on Italy itself and all the resources of the

capital, while, if they want to take the offensive, they have two fleets and full

command of the Illyrian Sea. Besides, what good to us are the ramparts of the

mountains? Why should we drag on the war into another summer? Where can

we get funds and supplies in the meanwhile? No, let us seize our opportunity.

The Pannonian legions are burning to rise in revenge. They were not defeatedbut deceived. The Moesian army has not yet lost a man. If you count not

legions but men, our forces are superior both in numbers and in character.

The very shame of our defeat makes for good discipline. And even then our

cavalry  was  not  beaten.  For  though  we  lost  the  day,  they  shattered  the

enemy's line.

 
And what was the force that broke through the Vitellians? Two regiments of

cavalry from Pannonia and Moesia. What have we now? Sixteen regiments.

Will  not  their  combined  forces,  as  they  roar  and  thunder  down  upon  the

enemy,  burying  them  in  clouds  of  dust,  overwhelm  these  horses  and

horsemen that have forgotten how to fight? I have given you my plan, and,

unless I am stopped, I will put it in operation. Some of you have not yet burnt

your boats. Well, you can keep back the legions. Give me the auxiliaries in

light marching order. They will be enough for me. You will soon hear that

the door of Italy is open and the power of Vitellius shaken. You will be glad

enough to follow in the footsteps of my victory.'

 
All this and much else of the same tenor Antonius poured out with flashing

eyes, raising his voice so as to reach the centurions and some of the soldiers,

who had gathered round to share in their deliberations. His truculent tone

carried away even the more cautious and far-seeing, while the rest of the

crowd were filled with contempt for the cowardice of the other generals, and

cheered their one and only leader to the echo. He had already established his

reputation at the original meeting, when Vespasian's letter was read. Most of

the generals had then taken an ambiguous line, intending to interpret their

language in the light of subsequent events. But Antonius seemed to have

taken the field without any disguise, and this carried more weight with the

men, who saw that he must share their disgrace or their glory.

 
Next to Antonius in influence stood Cornelius Fuscus, the imperial agent. He,

too, always attacked Vitellius in no mild terms, and had left himself no hope

in  case  of  failure.  Tampius  Flavianus  was  a  man  whose  disposition  and

advanced years inclined him to dilatory measures, and he soon began to earn

the dislike and suspicion of the soldiers, who felt he had not forgotten his

kinship with Vitellius. Besides this, when the legions first rose, he had fled to

Italy  and  subsequently  returned  of  his  own  free  will,  which  looked  like

meditating  treachery.  Having  once  given  up  his  province  and  returned  to

Italy, he was out of the reach of danger, but the passion for revolution hadinduced him to resume his title and meddle in the civil war. It was Cornelius

Fuscus who had persuaded him to this—not that he needed his assistance, but

because he felt that, especially at the outset of the rising, the prestige of an

ex-consul would be a valuable asset to the party.

 
In order to make their march across into Italy safe and effective, letters were

sent  to  Aponius  Saturninus  to  bring  the  Moesian  army  up  as  quickly  as

possible. To prevent the exposure of the defenceless provinces to the attacks

of  foreign  tribes,  the  chiefs  of  the  Sarmatian  Iazyges,  who  formed  the

government of the tribe, were enlisted in the service. They also offered their

tribal  force,  consisting  entirely  of  cavalry,  but  were  excused  from  this

contribution for fear that the civil war might give opportunity for a foreign

invasion, or that an offer of higher pay from the enemy might tempt them to

sacrifice their duty and their honour. Sido and Italicus, two princes of the

Suebi, were allowed to join Vespasian's side. They had long acknowledged

Roman sovereignty, and companionship in arms was likely to strengthen the

loyalty of the tribe. Some auxiliaries were stationed on the flank towards

Raetia,  where  hostilities  were  expected,  since  the  imperial  agent  Porcius

Septiminus,  remained  incorruptibly  loyal  to  Vitellius.  Sextilius  Felix  was

therefore  dispatched  with  Aurius'  Horse  and  eight  cohorts  of  auxiliary

infantry, together with the native levies of Noricum, to hold the line of the

river Aenus, which forms the frontier of Raetia and Noricum. Neither side

provoked a battle: the fortune of the rival parties was decided elsewhere.

 
Meanwhile, at the head of a picked band of auxiliaries and part of the cavalry,

Antonius hurried off to invade Italy. He took with him an energetic soldier

named  Arrius  Varus,  who  had  made  his  reputation  while  serving  under

Corbulo in his Armenian victories. He was supposed to have sought a private

interview with Nero, at which he maligned Corbulo's character. His infamous

treachery brought him the emperor's favour and a post as senior centurion.

This ill-gotten prize delighted him now, but ultimately proved his ruin.

 
After occupying Aquileia, Antonius and Varus found a ready welcome at

Opitergium and Altinum and all the other towns in the neighbourhood. At

Altinum a garrison was left behind to guard their communications against the

fleet at Ravenna, for the news of its desertion had not as yet arrived. Pressing

forward, they won Patavium and Ateste for the party. At the latter place they

learnt  that  three  cohorts  of  Vitellius'  auxiliary  infantry  and  a  regiment  ofcavalry, known as Sebosus' Horse, were established at Forum Alieni, where

they  had  constructed  a  bridge.  The  report  added  that  they  were  off  their

guard, so this seemed a good opportunity to attack them. They accordingly

rushed the position at dawn, and cut down many of the men without their

weapons. Orders had been given that, after a few had been killed, the rest

should  be  terrorized  into  desertion.  Some  surrendered  at  once,  but  the

majority succeeded in destroying the bridge, and thus checked the enemy's

pursuit. The first bout had gone in the Flavians' favour.

 
When the news spread to Poetovio, the Seventh Galbian and the Thirteenth

Gemina hurried in high spirits to Patavium under the command of Vedius

Aquila. At Patavium they were given a few days' rest, during which Minicius

Justus, the camp-prefect of the Seventh legion, who endeavoured to enforce a

standard of discipline too severe for civil war, had to be rescued from the fury

of his troops and sent to Vespasian. Antonius conceived that his party would

gain in prestige, if they showed approval of Galba's government, and stood

for the revival of his cause. So he gave orders that all the statues of Galba,

which had been thrown down during the civil war, should be replaced for

worship throughout the country towns. This was a thing that had long been

desired, and in their ambitious imaginations it assumed an undue importance.

 
The question then arose where they should choose their seat of war. The best

place seemed to be Verona. The open country round it was suited for the

manœuvres of the cavalry, in which their strength lay: and they would gain

both  prestige  and  profit  by  wresting  from  Vitellius  a  strongly  garrisoned

town.  On  the  road  they  occupied  Vicetia.  In  itself  this  was  a  very  small

matter,  since  there  was  only  a  moderate  force  in  the  town,  but  it  gained

considerable importance from the reflection that it was Caecina's birthplace:

the enemy's general had thus lost his native town. But Verona was well worth

while. The inhabitants could aid the party with encouragement and funds: the

army was thrust midway between Raetia and the Julian Alps, and had thus

blocked all passages by that route for the German armies.

 
This move had been made either without the knowledge or against the orders

of Vespasian. His instructions were to suspend operations at Aquileia and

wait for the arrival of Mucianus. He had further added this consideration, that

so  long  as  he  held  Egypt  and  the  key  to  the  corn-supply,  as  well  as  the

revenue  of  the  richest  provinces,  he  could  reduce  Vitellius'  army  tosubmission  from  sheer  lack  of  money  and  provisions.  Mucianus  had  sent

letter after letter with the same advice, pointing to the prospect of a victory

without  bloodshed  or  bereavement,  and  using  other  similar  pretexts  to

conceal his real motive. This was ambition. He wanted to keep all the glory

of the war to himself. However, the distance was so great that events outran

his instructions.

 
Antonius accordingly made a sudden sally against the enemy's outposts, and

after a slight skirmish, in which they tested each other's temper, both sides

withdrew  without  advantage.  Soon  after,  Caecina  entrenched  a  strong

position between a Veronese village called Hostilia and the marshes of the

river Tartaro. Here he was safe, with the river in his rear and the marsh to

guard his flanks. Had he added loyalty to his other advantages, he might have

employed the full strength of the Vitellian forces to crush the enemy's two

legions, before they were reinforced by the Moesian army, or, at least, have

forced them to retire in ignominious flight and abandon Italy. But Caecina

used various pretexts for delay, and at the outset of the war treacherously

yielded all his advantages to the enemy. While it was open to him to rout

them by force of arms, he preferred to pester them with letters and to wait

until his intermediaries had settled the terms of his treason. In the meantime,

Aponius Saturninus arrived with the Seventh Claudian legion, commanded

by  the  tribune  Vipstanus  Messala,  a  distinguished  member  of  a  famous

family, and the only man who brought any honesty to this war. To these

forces,  still  only  three  legions  and  no  match  for  the  Vitellians,  Caecina

addressed his letters. He criticized their rash attempt to sustain a lost cause,

and at the same time praised the courage of the German army in the highest

terms. His allusions to Vitellius were few and casual, and he refrained from

insulting Vespasian. In fact he used no language calculated either to seduce

or to terrorize the enemy. The Flavian generals made no attempt to explain

away  their  former  defeat.  They  proudly  championed  Vespasian,  showing

their  loyalty  to  the  cause,  their  confidence  in  the  army,  and  their  hostile

prejudice against Vitellius. To the tribunes and centurions they held out the

hope of retaining all the favours they had won from Vitellius, and they urged

Caecina himself in plain terms to desert. These letters were both read before a

meeting of the Flavian army, and served to increase their confidence, for

while Caecina wrote mildly and seemed afraid of offending Vespasian, their

own generals had answered contemptuously and scoffed at Vitellius. 
When  the  two  other  legions  arrived,  the  Third  commanded  by  Dillius

Aponianus, and the Eighth by Numisius Lupus, Antonius decided to entrench

Verona and make a demonstration in force. It so happened that the Galbian

legion, who had been told off to work in the trenches facing the enemy,

catching sight of some of their allies' cavalry in the distance, took them for

the enemy, and fell into a groundless panic. Suspecting treachery, they seized

their arms and visited their fury on Tampius Flavianus. They could prove no

charge against him, but he had long been unpopular, and a blind impulse

made them clamour for his head. He was Vitellius' kinsman, they howled; he

had betrayed Otho; he had embezzled their donative. They would listen to no

defence, although he implored them with outstretched hands, grovelling for

the most part flat upon the ground, his clothes all torn, his face and chest

shaken with sobs. This only served to inflame the soldiers' anger. His very

excess of terror seemed to prove his guilt.

 
Aponius tried to address them, but his voice was drowned in their shouts. The

others, too, were contemptuously howled down. They would give no one a

hearing except Antonius, who had the power of authority as well as the arts

of eloquence necessary to quiet a mob. When the riot grew worse, and they

began to pass from insulting speeches to murderous violence, he gave orders

that  Flavianus  should  be  put  in  chains.  Feeling  that  this  was  a  farce,  the

soldiers broke through the guards round the general's quarters, prepared to

resort  to  extremities.  Whereupon  Antonius,  drawing  his  sword,  bared  his

breast  and  vowed  that  he  would  die  either  by  their  hands  or  his  own.

Whenever  he  saw  a  soldier  whom  he  knew  or  could  recognize  by  his

decorations, he called on him by name to come to the rescue. At last he

turned towards the standards and the gods of war, and prayed incessantly that

they would rather inspire the enemy's army with this mad spirit of mutiny. At

last  the  riot  died  away  and  at  nightfall  they  all  dispersed  to  their  tents.

Flavianus left that same night, and on his way met letters from Vespasian,

which delivered him from danger.

 
The  infection  seemed  to  spread  among  the  legions.  They  next  attacked

Aponius Saturninus, who was in command of the Moesian army. This fresh

disturbance was caused by the circulation of a letter, which Saturninus was

supposed to have written to Vitellius, and it was the more alarming since it

broke out not when they were tired by their labours but in the middle of theday. Once the soldiers had vied with each other in courage and discipline:

now they were rivals in ribaldry and riot. They were determined that the fury

with  which  they  denounced  Aponius  should  not  fall  short  of  their  outcry

against Flavianus. The Moesian legions remembered that they had helped the

Pannonian army to take their revenge; while the Pannonian troops, feeling

that their comrades' mutiny acquitted them of blame, were glad enough to

repeat the crime. They invaded the country house in which Saturninus was

living. He escaped, however, aided not so much by the efforts of Antonius,

Aponianus, and Messala, who did everything in their power to rescue him,

but rather by the security of his hiding-place, for he concealed himself in the

furnace of some disused baths. Eventually he gave up his lictors and retired

to Patavium. The departure of both the consular governors left Antonius in

supreme command of the two armies. His colleagues deferred to him and the

men gave him enthusiastic support. It was even supposed by some that he had

cunningly promoted both outbreaks, to secure for himself the full profit of the

war.

 
 

 
                            Dissension in Vitellius' Camp

 
 

 
Vitellius' party was equally a prey to disquiet, and there the dissension was

the more fatal, since it was aroused not by the men's suspicions but by the

treachery of the generals. The sailors of the fleet at Ravenna were mostly

drawn from the provinces of Dalmatia and Pannonia, which were both held

for  Vespasian,  and  while  they  were  still  wavering,  the  admiral,  Lucilius

Bassus, decided them in favour of the Flavian party. Choosing the night-time

for  their  treason,  the  conspirators  assembled  at  head-quarters  without  the

knowledge of the other sailors. Bassus, who was either ashamed or uncertain

of their success, awaited developments in his house. Amid great disturbance

the ships' captains attacked the images of Vitellius and cut down the few men

who  offered  any  resistance.  The  rest  of  the  fleet  were  glad  enough  of  a

change, and their sympathies soon came round to Vespasian. Then Lucilius

appeared and publicly claimed responsibility. The fleet appointed Cornelius

Fuscus as their admiral, and he came hurrying on to the scene. Bassus was

put  under  honourable  arrest  and  conveyed  with  an  escort  of  Liburniancruisers  to  Atria,  where  he  was  imprisoned  by  Vibennius  Rufinus,  who

commanded a regiment of auxiliary horse in garrison there. However, he was

soon set free on the intervention of Hormus, one of the emperor's freedmen.

For he, too, ranked as a general.

 
When  the  news  that  the  navy  had  gone  over  became  known,  Caecina,

carefully selecting a moment when the camp was deserted, and the men had

all  gone  to  their  various  duties,  summoned  to  head-quarters  the  senior

centurions and a few of the soldiers. He then proceeded to praise the spirit

and the strength of Vespasian's party: 'they themselves had been deserted by

the fleet; they were cramped for supplies; Spain and Gaul were against them;

Rome could not be trusted.' In every way he exaggerated the weakness of

Vitellius' position. Eventually, when some of his accomplices had given the

cue and the rest were dumbfoundered by his change of front, he made them

all swear allegiance to Vespasian. Immediately the portraits of Vitellius were

torn  down  and  messengers  dispatched  to  Antonius.  However,  when  the

treason got abroad in the camp, and the men returning to head-quarters saw

Vespasian's name on the standards and Vitellius' portraits scattered on the

ground, at first there was an ominous silence: then with one voice they all

vented their feelings. Had the pride of the German army sunk so low that

without a battle and without a blow they should let their hands be shackled

and render up their arms? What had they against them? None but defeated

troops. The only sound legions of Otho's army, the First and the Fourteenth,

Vespasian had not got, and even those they had routed and cut to pieces on

that  same  field.  And  all  for  what?  That  these  thousands  of  fighting  men

should be handed over like a drove of slaves to Antonius, the convict!

 
'Eight legions, forsooth, are to follow the lead of one miserable fleet. Such is

the pleasure of Bassus and Caecina. They have robbed the emperor of his

home, his estate, and all his wealth, and now they want to take away his

troops. We have never lost a man nor shed a drop of blood. The very Flavians

will despise us. What answer can we give when they question us about our

victory or our defeat?'

 
Thus they shouted one and all as their indignation urged them. Led by the

Fifth legion, they replaced the portraits of Vitellius and put Caecina in irons.

They selected Fabius Fabullus, commanding the Fifth legion, and the camp-

prefect,  Cassius  Longus,  to  lead  them.  Some  marines  who  arrived  at  thispoint from three Liburnian cruisers, quite innocent and unaware of what had

happened,  were  promptly  butchered.  Then  the  men  deserted  their  camp,

broke down the bridge, and marched back to Hostilia, and thence to Cremona

to  join  the  two  legions,  the  First  Italian  and  Twenty-first  Rapax,  which

Caecina had sent ahead with some of the cavalry to occupy Cremona.

 
 

 
                        The Engagement near Cremona

 
 

 
When Antonius heard of this he determined to attack the enemy while they

were still at variance and their forces divided. The Vitellian generals would

soon recover their authority and the troops their discipline, and confidence

would come if the two divisions were allowed to join. He guessed also that

Fabius Valens had already started from Rome and would hasten his march

when he heard of Caecina's treachery. Valens was loyal to Vitellius and an

experienced soldier. There was good reason, besides, to fear an attack on the

side of Raetia from an immense force of German irregulars. Vitellius had

already  summoned  auxiliaries  from  Britain,  Gaul,  and  Spain  in  sufficient

numbers to blight their chances utterly, had not Antonius in fear of this very

prospect forestalled the victory by hurriedly forcing an engagement. In two

days he marched his whole force from Verona to Bedriacum. On the next day

he  left  his  legions  behind  to  fortify  the  camp,  and  sent  out  his  auxiliary

infantry into territory belonging to Cremona, to taste the joys of plundering

their  compatriots  under  pretext  of  collecting  supplies.  To  secure  greater

freedom  for  their  depredations,  he  himself  advanced  at  the  head  of  four

thousand cavalry eight miles along the road from Bedriacum. The scouts, as

is usual, turned their attention further afield.

 
About eleven in the morning a mounted scout galloped up with the news that

the enemy were at hand; there was a small body in advance of the rest, but

the noise of an army in movement could be heard over the country-side.

While Antonius was debating what he ought to do, Arrius Varus, who was

greedy to distinguish himself, galloped out with the keenest of the troopers

and charged the Vitellians, inflicting only slight loss; for, on the arrival of

reinforcements, the tables were turned and those who had been hottest in

pursuit were now hindmost in the rout. Their haste had no sanction fromAntonius, who had foreseen what would happen. Encouraging his men to

engage with brave hearts, he drew off the cavalry on to each flank and left a

free passage in the centre to receive Varus and his troopers. Orders were sent

to  the  legions  to  arm  and  signals  were  displayed  to  the  foraging  party,

summoning  them  to  cease  plundering  and  join  the  battle  by  the  quickest

possible path. Meanwhile Varus came plunging in terror into the middle of

their ranks, spreading confusion among them. The fresh troops were swept

back  along  with  the  wounded,  themselves  sharing  the  panic  and  sorely

embarrassed by the narrowness of the road.

 
In all the confusion of the rout Antonius never for a moment forgot what

befitted a determined general and a brave soldier. Staying the panic-stricken,

checking the fugitives, wherever the fight was thickest, wherever he saw a

gleam of hope, he schemed, he fought, he shouted, always conspicuous to his

own men and a mark for the enemy. At last, in the heat of his impatience, he

thrust through with a lance a standard-bearer, who was in full flight, then

seized the standard and turned it against the enemy. Whereupon for very

shame a few of his troopers, not more than a hundred, made a stand. The

nature of the ground helped them. The road there was narrower; a stream

barred their way, and the bridge was broken; its depth was uncertain and the

steep  banks  checked  their  flight.  Thus  necessity  or  chance  restored  their

fallen fortunes. Forming in close order, they received the Vitellians' reckless

and  disordered  charge,  and  at  once  flung  them  into  confusion.  Antonius

pressed hard on the fugitives and cut down all who blocked his path. The

others  followed  each  his  inclination,  rifling  the  dead,  capturing  prisoners,

seizing arms and horses. Meanwhile, summoned by their shouts of triumph,

those who had just now been in full flight across the fields came hurrying

back to share the victory.

 
Four miles from Cremona they saw the standards of the Rapax and Italian

legions gleaming in the sun. They had marched out thus far under cover of

their  cavalry's  original  success.  When  fortune  turned  against  them,  they

neither opened their ranks to receive the routed troops nor marched out to

attack the enemy, who were wearied with fighting and their long pursuit.

While all went well the Vitellians did not miss their general, but in the hour

of danger they realized their loss. The victorious cavalry came charging into

their wavering line, and at the same time Vipstanus Messala arrived with the

Moesian auxiliaries and a good number of men from the legions, who hadkept up with the pace of their forced march. These combined forces broke the

opposing column, and the proximity of Cremona's sheltering walls gave the

Vitellians more hope of refuge and less stomach for resistance.

 
 

 
                                The Fate of Cremona

 
 

 
Antonius did not follow up his advantage. He realized that, although the issue

had  been  successful,  the  battle  had  long  been  doubtful,  and  had  cost  the

troopers and their horses many wounds and much hard fighting. As evening

fell,  the  whole  strength  of  the  Flavian  army  arrived.  They  had  marched

among heaps of corpses, and the still reeking traces of slaughter, and now,

feeling that the war was over, they clamoured to advance at once on Cremona

and either receive its submission or take it by storm. This sounded well for

public utterance, but each man in his heart was thinking, 'We could easily

rush a city on the plain. In a night-assault men are just as brave and have a

better chance of plunder. If we wait for day it will be all peace and petitions,

and what shall we get for our wounds and our labours? A reputation for

mercy! There's no money in that. All the wealth of Cremona will find its way

into the officers' pockets. Storm a city, and the plunder goes to the soldiers: if

it surrenders, the generals get it.' They refused to listen to their centurions and

tribunes and drowned their voices in a rattle of arms, swearing they would

break their orders unless they were led out.

 
Antonius  then  went  round  among  the  companies,  where  his  authoritative

bearing obtained silence. He assured them that he had no wish to rob them of

the glory and the reward they so well deserved. 'But,' he said, 'an army and a

general have different functions. It is right that soldiers should be greedy for

battle, but the general often does more good not by temerity but by foresight,

deliberation and delay. I have done all I could to aid your victory with my

sword: now I will serve you by the general's proper arts of calculation and

strategy. The risks that face us are obvious. It is night; we know nothing of

the lie of the city; the enemy are behind the walls; everything favours an

ambush. Even if the gates were open, we cannot safely enter except by day

and after due reconnoitring. Are you going to begin storming the town when

you cannot possibly see where the ground is level and how high the wallsare? How do you know whether to assault it with engines and showers of

missiles, or with penthouses and shelters?'

 
Then he turned to individuals, asking one after another whether they had

brought hatchets and pick-axes and other implements for storming a town.

When they answered no, 'Well,' he said, 'could any troops possibly break

through  walls  or  undermine  them  with  nothing  but  swords  and  javelins?

Suppose it proves necessary to construct a mound and to shelter ourselves

with mantlets and fascines, are we going to stand idle like a lot of helpless

idiots, gaping at the height of the enemy's towers and ramparts? Why not

rather wait one night till our siege-train arrives and then carry the victory by

force?' So saying, he sent the camp-followers and servants with the freshest

of the troopers back to Bedriacum to bring up supplies and whatever else was

wanted.

 
The soldiers indeed chafed at this and mutiny seemed imminent, when some

of the mounted scouts, who had ridden right up to the walls, captured a few

stragglers from Cremona, and learnt from them that six Vitellian legions and

the whole Hostilia army had that very day covered thirty miles, and, hearing

of their comrades' defeat, were already arming for battle and would be on

them immediately. This alarming news cured their obstinate deafness to the

general's advice. He ordered the Thirteenth legion to take up their position on

the raised Postumian high-road. In touch with them on the left wing in the

open  country  were  the  Seventh  Galbian,  beside  whom  stood  the  Seventh

Claudian, so placed that their front was protected by a ditch. On the right

wing were the Eighth, drawn up along an open cross-road, and next to them

the Third, distributed among some thick clumps of trees. Such, at any rate,

was the order of the eagles and standards. In the darkness the soldiers were

confused and took their places at random. The band of Guards was next to the

Third, and the auxiliaries on the wings, while the cavalry were disposed in

support round the flanks and the rear. Sido and Italicus with their picked band

of Suebi fought in the front line.

 
For the Vitellians the right course was to rest at Cremona and recuperate their

strength with food and a night's rest, and then on the next day to crush and

rout the Flavians when they were stiff with cold and weak from hunger. But

they had no general; they had no plan. Though it was nearly nine at night

they flung themselves upon the Flavians, who were standing steady in theirplaces to receive them. In their fury and the darkness the Vitellian line was so

disordered that one can hardly venture to describe the disposition of their

troops. However, it has been stated that the Fourth Macedonian legion were

on  the  right  flank;  in  the  centre  were  the  Fifth  and  Fifteenth  with  the

detachments of the Ninth, the Second and the Twentieth from Britain; the

Sixteenth, the Twenty-second, and the First formed the left wing. The men of

the Rapax and Italian legions were distributed among all the companies. The

cavalry and auxiliaries picked their own position. All night the battle raged

with  varying  fortune,  never  decided,  always  savagely  contested.  Disaster

threatened now one side, now the other. Courage, strength were of little use:

their eyes could not even see in front of them. Both sides were armed alike;

the watchwords, constantly demanded, soon became known; the standards

were all in confusion, as they were captured and carried off from one band to

another.  The  Seventh  legion,  raised  recently  by  Galba,  suffered  most

severely. Six of the senior centurions fell and several standards were lost.

They nearly lost their eagle too, but it was rescued by the bravery of the

senior centurion, named Atilius Verus, who after great slaughter of the enemy

fell finally himself.

 
Antonius had meanwhile called up the Guards to reinforce his wavering line.

Taking up the fight, they repulsed the enemy, only to be repulsed in their

turn. For the Vitellian artillery, which had at first been scattered all along the

line, and had been discharged upon the bushes without hurting the enemy,

was now massed upon the high-road, and swept the open space in front. One

immense engine in particular, which belonged to the Fifteenth, mowed down

the Flavian line with huge stones. The slaughter thus caused would have been

enormous,  had  not  two  of  the  Flavian  soldiers  performed  a  memorable

exploit. Concealing their identity by snatching up shields from among the

enemy's dead, they cut the ropes which suspended the weights of the engine.

They  fell  immediately,  riddled  with  wounds,  and  so  their  names  have

perished. But of their deed there is no doubt.

 
Fortune had favoured neither side when, as the night wore on, the moon rose

and threw a deceptive glamour over the field of battle. Shining from behind

the Flavians the moon was in their favour. It magnified the shadows of their

men and horses so that the enemy took the shadow for the substance, and

their missiles were misdirected and fell short. The Vitellians, on the other

hand, had the moon shining full on them and were an easy mark for theFlavians, shooting as it were out of cover.

 
Thus being enabled to recognize his own men, and to be recognized by them,

Antonius appealed to some by taunting their honour, to many by words of

praise and encouragement, to all by promising hope of reward. He asked the

Pannonian legions why they had drawn their swords again. Here on this field

they could regain their glory and wipe out the stain of their former disgrace.

Then turning to the Moesian troops, who were the chief promoters of the war,

he told them it was no good challenging the Vitellians with verbal threats, if

they could not bear to face them and their blows. Thus he addressed each

legion as he reached it. To the Third he spoke at greater length, reminding

them of their victories both old and new. Had they not under Mark Antony

defeated the Parthians and the Armenians under Corbulo? Had they not but

lately  crushed  the  Sarmatians?  Then  he  turned  in  fury  on  the  Guards.

'Peasants that you are,' he shouted, 'have you another emperor, another camp

waiting to shelter you, if you are defeated? There in the enemy's line are your

standards  and  your  arms:  defeat  means  death  and—no,  you  have  drained

disgrace already to the dregs.'

 
These words roused cheers on all sides, and the Third, following the Syrian

custom, saluted the rising sun. Thus arose a casual rumour—or possibly it

was suggested by the general's ingenuity—that Mucianus had arrived, and

that the two armies were cheering each other. On they pressed, feeling they

had been reinforced. The Vitellian line was more ragged now, for, having no

general  to  marshal  them,  their  ranks  now  filled,  now  thinned,  with  each

alternation of courage and fear. As soon as Antonius saw them waver, he kept

thrusting at them in massed column. The line bent and then broke, and the

inextricable confusion of wagons and siege-engines prevented their rallying.

The victorious troops scattered along the cross-road in headlong pursuit.

 
The slaughter was marked by one peculiar horror. A son killed his father. I

give the facts and names on the authority of Vipstanus Messala. One Julius

Mansuetus, a Spaniard who had joined the legion Rapax, had left a young son

at home. This boy subsequently grew up and enlisted in the Seventh legion,

raised by Galba. Chance now sent his father in his way, and he felled him to

the ground. While he was ransacking the dying man, they recognized each

other. Flinging his arms round the now lifeless corpse, in a piteous voice he

implored his father's spirit to be appeased and not to turn against him as aparricide. The crime was his country's, he cried; what share had a single

soldier in these civil wars? Meanwhile he lifted the body and began to dig a

grave  and  perform  the  last  rites  for  his  father.  Those  who  were  nearest

noticed this; then the story began to spread, till there ran through the army

astonishment and many complaints and curses against this wicked war. Yet

they  never  ceased  busily  killing  and  plundering  friends  and  relatives  and

brothers;  and  while  they  talked  of  the  crime  they  were  committing  it

themselves.

 
When they reached Cremona a fresh task of vast difficulty awaited them.

During the war with Otho the German army had entrenched their camp round

the walls of Cremona and then erected a rampart round the camp; and these

fortifications had been further strengthened. The sight of them brought the

victors to a halt, and their generals were uncertain what instructions to give.

The troops had had no rest for a day and a night. To storm the town at once

would be an arduous and, in the absence of reserves, a perilous task. On the

other hand, a retreat to Bedriacum would involve the intolerable fatigue of a

long  march,  and  destroy  the  value  of  their  victory.  Again,  it  would  be

dangerous to entrench themselves so close to the lines of the enemy, who

might at any minute sally forth and rout them while they were dispersed and

digging trenches. The chief anxiety lay in the temper of the men, who were

much  more  ready  to  face  danger  than  delay.  To  them  discretion  was

disagreeable and hazard spelt hope. Their thirst for plunder outweighed all

fears of wounds and bloodshed.

 
Antonius also inclined to this view and gave orders for them to surround the

rampart. At first they stood back and delivered volleys of arrows and stones,

suffering themselves the severer loss, for a storm of missiles rained down

from the walls. Antonius then told off each legion to assault a different point

of the rampart or one of the gates, hoping that by thus separating them he

could distinguish the cowards from the brave and inflame them with a spirit

of honourable rivalry. The Third and Seventh took the position nearest the

road to Bedriacum; the Eighth and Seventh Claudian assaulted the right-hand

side of the rampart; the Thirteenth swept up to the Brixian Gate. A brief delay

was caused while some fetched mattocks and pickaxes from the fields, and

others hooks and ladders. Then holding their shields above their heads in

close  'tortoise'  formation,  they  advanced  under  the  rampart.  Both  sides

employed Roman tactics. The Vitellians rolled down huge masses of stones,and, as the sheltering cover of shields parted and wavered, they thrust at it

with lances and poles, until at last the whole structure was broken up and they

mowed down the torn and bleeding soldiers beneath with terrible slaughter.

 
The men would certainly have hesitated, had not the generals, realizing that

they were really too tired to respond to any other form of encouragement,

pointed  significantly  to  Cremona.  Whether  this  was  Hormus's  idea,  as

Messala  records,  or  whether  we  should  rather  follow  Caius  Pliny,  who

accuses  Antonius,  it  is  not  easy  to  determine.  This  one  may  say,  that,

however abominable the crime, yet in committing it neither Antonius nor

Hormus belied the reputation of their lives. After this neither wounds nor

bloodshed could stay the Flavian troops. They demolished the rampart, shook

the  gates,  climbed  up  on  each  other's  shoulders,  or  over  the  re-formed

'tortoise', and snatched away the enemy's weapons or caught hold of them by

the arms. Thus the wounded and unwounded, the half-dead and the dying, all

came rolling down and perished together by every imaginable kind of death.

 
The  fight  raged  thickest  round  the  Third  and  Seventh  legions,  and  the

general, Antonius, came up with a picked band of auxiliaries to support their

assault.  The  Vitellians,  finding  themselves  unable  to  resist  the  attack  of

troops thus stubbornly vying with each other, and seeing their missiles all

glide off the shelter of shields, at last sent their engine of war crashing down

upon their heads. For the moment it scattered and crushed beneath it the men

on whom it fell, but it dragged with it some of the battlements and the top of

the rampart. At the same moment one of the towers on the rampart gave way

under a shower of stones. While the men of the Seventh struggled up to the

breach in close column, the Third hewed down the gate with hatchets and

swords. All the authorities agree that Caius Volusius of the Third legion was

the first man in. Emerging on the top of the rampart, he hurled down those

who barred his path, and from this conspicuous position waved his hand and

shouted  that  the  camp  was  taken.  The  others  poured  through,  while  the

Vitellians in panic flung themselves down from the rampart, and the whole

space between the camp and the walls became a seething scene of carnage.

 
Here, again, was a new type of task for the Flavians. Here were high walls,

stone  battlements,  iron-barred  gates,  and  soldiers  hurling  javelins.  The

citizens of Cremona were numerous and devoted to the cause of Vitellius,

and half Italy had gathered there for the Fair which fell just at that time. Theirnumbers were a help to the defenders, but the prospect of plundering them

offered an incentive to their assailants. Antonius ordered his men to bring fire

and apply it to the most beautiful of the buildings outside the walls, hoping

that the loss of their property might induce the citizens to turn traitor. The

houses that stood nearest to the walls and overtopped them he crowded with

his bravest troops, who dislodged the defenders with showers of beams and

tiles and flaming torches.

 
Meanwhile, some of the legionaries began to advance in 'tortoise' formation,

while others kept up a steady fire of javelins and stones. Gradually the spirit

of the Vitellians ebbed. The higher their rank, the more easily they gave way

to misfortune. For they were afraid that if Cremona too was demolished,

there would be no hope of pardon; the victors' fury would fall not on the

common poor but on the tribunes and centurions, whom it would pay to kill.

The common soldiers felt safe in their obscurity, and, careless of the future,

continued to offer resistance. They roamed the streets or hid themselves in

houses, and though they had given up the war, refused even so to sue for

peace. Meanwhile the tribunes and centurions did away with the name and

portraits  of  Vitellius.  They  released  Caecina,  who  was  still  in  irons,  and

begged  his  help  in  pleading  their  cause.  When  he  turned  from  them  in

haughty contempt they besought him with tears. It was, indeed, the last of

evils that all these brave men should invoke a traitor's aid. They then hung

veils and fillets out on the walls, and when Antonius had given the order to

cease  firing,  they  carried  out  their  standards  and  eagles,  followed  by  a

miserable column of disarmed soldiers, dejectedly hanging their heads. The

victors had at first crowded round, heaping insults on them and threatening

violence, but when they found that the vanquished had lost all their proud

spirit, and turned their cheeks with servile endurance to every indignity, they

gradually began to recollect that these were the men who had made such a

moderate use of their victory at Bedriacum. But when the crowd parted, and

Caecina advanced in his consular robes, attended by his lictors in full state,

their  indignation  broke  into  flame.  They  charged  him  with  insolence  and

cruelty, and—so hateful is crime—they even flung his treachery in his teeth.

Antonius restrained them and sent Caecina under escort to Vespasian.

 
Meanwhile the citizens of Cremona suffered sorely from the violence of the

troops, and only the entreaties of their generals could withhold them from a

general  massacre.  Antonius  summoned  a  mass  meeting  and  delivered  aeulogy upon his victorious army, promising mercy to the vanquished and

speaking of Cremona in ambiguous terms. Besides their natural passion for

plunder, there was an old grudge which urged them to sack Cremona. The

town was believed to have given assistance to the Vitellian cause before this

in the war with Otho; and again, when the Thirteenth had been left behind to

build an amphitheatre, the populace had shown its town-bred impertinence by

assailing them with insolent ridicule. Other causes increased this bad feeling:

it  was  here  that  Caecina  had  given  his  show  of  gladiators:  the  town  had

become for a second time the theatre of the war: the citizens had conveyed

food to the Vitellians during the battle: some women had been killed, whose

enthusiasm for the cause had led them to take part in the fight. Besides all

this, the Fair had filled the rich city with an even greater display of wealth

than usual. All eyes were now centred on Antonius, whose fame and good

fortune overshadowed all the other generals. It so happened that he hurried

off  to  the  baths  to  wash  off  the  stains  of  blood.  Finding  fault  with  the

temperature of the water, he received the answer, 'It will not be long before it

is hot,' and this phrase was caught up. The attendant's words were repeated,

and brought all the odium on Antonius, who was thus believed to have given

the signal to set fire to Cremona, which was already in flames.

 
Thus forty thousand soldiers burst into the town with a yet larger crowd of

servants and sutlers, even more depraved than the soldiers in their readiness

for cruelty and lust. Without any respect for age or for authority they added

rape to murder and murder to rape. Aged men and decrepit old women, who

were worthless as booty, were hustled off to make sport for them. If some

grown girl or a handsome youth fell into their clutches, they would be torn to

pieces in the struggle for possession, while the plunderers were left to cut

each other's throats. Whoever carried off money or any of the solid gold

offerings in the temples was liable to be cut to pieces, if he met another

stronger than himself. Some, disdaining easy finds, hunted for hidden hoards,

and dug out buried treasure, flogging and torturing the householders. They

held torches in their hands and, having once secured their prize, would fling

them wantonly into an empty house or some dismantled temple. Composed

as the army was of citizens, allies, and foreign troops, differing widely in

language and customs, the objects of the soldiers' greed differed also. But

while their views of what was right might vary, they all agreed in thinking

nothing wrong. Cremona lasted them four days. While all other buildingssacred and secular sank in the flames, only the temple of Mefitis outside the

walls  was  left  standing,  saved  either  by  its  position  or  the  power  of  the

presiding deity.

 
Such was the end of Cremona two hundred and eighty-six years after its

foundation.  It  had  been  originally  built  in  the  consulship  of  Tiberius

Sempronius and Publius Cornelius, while Hannibal was threatening to invade

Italy, to serve as a bulwark against the Gauls beyond the Po, and to resist any

other power that might break in over the Alps. And so it grew and flourished,

aided  by  its  large  number  of  settlers,  its  conveniently  situated  rivers,  the

fertility of its territory, and its connexion through alliance and intermarriage

with  other  communities.  Foreign  invasions  had  left  it  untouched  only  to

become the victim of civil war. Antonius, ashamed of his crime, and realizing

his growing disfavour, proclaimed that no citizen of Cremona was to be kept

as  a  prisoner  of  war;  and,  indeed,  the  unanimous  feeling  in  Italy  against

buying such slaves had already frustrated the soldiers' hope of profit. So they

began to kill their captives, whose relatives and friends, when this became

known, covertly bought their release. After a while, the rest of the inhabitants

returned, and the squares and temples were rebuilt by the munificence of the

burghers and under Vespasian's direct patronage.

 
However, the soil was so foully infected by the reek of blood that it was

impossible for the Flavians to encamp for long on the ruins of this buried

city. They advanced along the road to the third milestone, and mustered the

Vitellians, still straggling and panic-stricken, each under his own standard.

The defeated legions were then distributed through Illyricum, for the civil

war was still in progress and their fidelity could not be relied on. They then

dispatched couriers to carry the news to Britain and the Spanish provinces.

To Gaul they sent an officer named Julius Calenus, to Germany Alpinius

Montanus,  who  had  commanded  an  auxiliary  cohort.  Montanus  was  a

Treviran  and  Calenus  an  Aeduan;  both  had  fought  for  Vitellius  and  thus

served to advertise Vespasian's victory. At the same time garrisons were sent

to hold the passes of the Alps, for fear that Germany might rise in support of

Vitellius.

 
 

 
                                        Vitellius 
 

 
When Caecina had left Rome, Vitellius, after an interval of a few days, sent

Fabius Valens hurrying to the front, and then proceeded to drown his cares in

self-indulgence.  He  neither  made  any  provision  for  the  war,  nor  tried  to

increase the efficiency of his troops either by haranguing or by drilling them.

He did not keep himself in the public eye, but retired into the pleasant shade

of his gardens, regarding past, present, and future with equal indifference,

like one of those listless animals which lie sluggish, and torpid so long as you

supply them with food. While he thus loitered languid and indolent in the

woods of Aricia, he received the startling news of Lucilius Bassus' treachery

and the disaffection of the fleet at Ravenna. Soon afterwards he heard with

mixed feelings of distress and satisfaction that Caecina had deserted him and

had  been  imprisoned  by  the  army.  On  his  insensate  nature  joy  had  more

effect than trouble. He returned in triumph to Rome and at a crowded meeting

praised the devotion of the troops in extravagant terms. He gave orders for

the  imprisonment  of  Publilius  Sabinus,  the  prefect  of  the  Guards,  on  the

ground of his intimacy with Caecina, and appointed Alfenus Varus in his

place.

 
He next delivered a pompous and elaborate speech in the senate, where he

was loaded with far-fetched compliments by the members. Lucius Vitellius

rose  to  propose  a  harsh  sentence  against  Caecina.  The  rest  of  the  house

inveighed with assumed indignation against the consul who had betrayed his

country, the general who had betrayed his commander-in-chief, the friend

who  had  betrayed  his  benefactor  to  whom  he  owed  all  his  riches  and

distinction. But their protestations of sympathy with Vitellius really voiced

their personal vexation. None of the speeches contained any criticism of the

Flavian  generals.  They  threw  the  blame  on  the  misguided  and  impolitic

action  of  the  armies,  and  with  cautious  circumlocution  avoided  all  direct

mention  of  Vespasian.  Caecina's  consulship  had  still  one  day  to  run,  and

Rosius  Regulus  actually  made  humble  petition  for  this  one  day's  office,

Vitellius'  offer  and  his  acceptance  exciting  universal  derision.  Thus  he

entered and abdicated his office on the same day, the last of October. Men

who were learned in constitutional history pointed out that no one before had

ever been elected to fill a vacancy without the passing of a bill or some act of

deprivation, although there was precedent for the one day consulship in thecase of Caninius Rebilus when Caius Caesar was dictator and the civil war

necessitated prompt rewards.

 
It was at this time that the news of the death of Junius Blaesus gave rise to

much talk. I give the story as I find it. When Vitellius was lying seriously ill

at his house in the Servilian Park, he noticed that a neighbouring mansion

was brilliantly illuminated at night. On asking the reason, he was told that

Caecina Tuscus was giving a large dinner-party, at which Junius Blaesus was

the  chief  guest.  He  further  received  an  exaggerated  account  of  their

extravagance  and  dissipation.  Some  of  his  informants  even  made  specific

charges  against  Tuscus  and  others,  but  especially  accused  Blaesus  for

spending his days in revelry while his emperor lay ill. There are people who

keep a sharp eye on every sign of an emperor's displeasure. They soon made

sure that Vitellius was furious and that Blaesus' ruin would be an easy task,

so they cast Lucius Vitellius for the part of common informer. He had a mean

and jealous dislike for Blaesus, whose spotless reputation far outshone his

own,  which  was  tainted  with  every  kind  of  infamy.  Bursting  into  the

emperor's apartment, he caught up Vitellius' young son in his arms and fell at

his feet. When asked the reason of this excitement, he said it was due to no

anxiety for himself; all his suit and all his prayers were for his brother and his

brother's  children.  Their  fears  of  Vespasian  were  idle:  between  him  and

Vitellius lay all the legions of Germany, all those brave and loyal provinces,

and an immeasurable space of land and sea. 'It is here in Rome,' he cried, 'in

the bosom of our household that we have an enemy to fear, one who boasts

the Junii and Antonii as his ancestors, one who shows himself affable and

munificent to the troops, posing as a descendant of imperial stock. It is to him

that Rome's attention turns, while you, Sire, careless who is friend or foe,

cherish in your bosom a rival, who sits feasting at his table and watches his

emperor in pain. You must requite his unseasonable gaiety with a night of

deadly sorrow, in which he may both know and feel that Vitellius lives and is

his emperor, and, if anything should happen, has a son to be his heir.'

 
Vitellius hesitated anxiously between his criminal desires and his fear that, if

he deferred Blaesus' death, he might hasten his own ruin, or by giving official

orders for it might raise a storm of indignation. He decided to proceed by

poison. The suspicion against him he confirmed by going to see Blaesus and

showing obvious satisfaction. Moreover, he was heard to make the savage

boast that he had, to quote his own words, 'feasted his eyes on his enemy'sdeathbed.'  Blaesus,  besides  his  distinguished  origin  and  refined  character,

was steadfastly loyal. Even before the decline of Vitellius' cause he had been

canvassed by Caecina and other party leaders, who were turning against the

emperor, and had met them with a persistent refusal. He was a man of quiet

and blameless life, with no ambition for the principate or, indeed, for any

sudden distinction, but he could not escape the danger of being considered

worthy of it.

 
Meanwhile  Fabius  Valens,  encumbered  by  a  long  train  of  harlots  and

eunuchs, was conducting a leisurely advance, most unlike a march to the

front, when couriers arrived post-haste with the news that Lucilius Bassus

had surrendered the Ravenna fleet. If he had hurried forward on his march he

might have been in time to save Caecina's faltering loyalty, or to have joined

the legions before the critical engagement was fought. Many, indeed, advised

him to avoid Ravenna and to make his way by obscure by-roads to Hostilia or

Cremona. Others wanted him to send to Rome for the Guards and to break

through the enemy's lines with a strong force. Valens himself, with helpless

indecision,  let  the  time  for  action  go  by  while  he  took  advice;  and  then

rejecting the advice he was offered, chose the middle course, which is always

the worst in a crisis, and thus failed both in courage and in caution.

 
He  wrote  to  Vitellius  demanding  reinforcements,  and  there  arrived  three

cohorts of Guards and a regiment of cavalry from Britain, too many to slip

through unobserved and too few to force a passage. But even in such a crisis

as this Valens' reputation was as unsavoury as ever. He was still believed to

use violence in the pursuit of illicit pleasures, and to betray the confidence of

his hosts by seducing their wives and families. He had money and authority

to help him, and the feverish impatience of one whose star is on the wane. At

last the arrival of the reinforcements revealed the perversity of his strategy.

He  had  too  few  men  to  assume  the  offensive,  even  if  they  had  been

unquestionably loyal, and their loyalty was under grave suspicion. However,

their sense of decency and respect for the general restrained them for a while,

though such ties are soon broken when troops are disinclined for danger and

indifferent  to  disgrace.  Fearing  trouble,  he  sent  the  Guards  forward  to

Ariminum with the cavalry to secure the rear. Valens himself, with a few

companions, whose loyalty had survived misfortune, turned off into Umbria

and thence to Etruria, where he learnt the result of the battle of Cremona.

Thereupon he formed a plan, which was far from cowardly and might havehad alarming consequences, if it had succeeded. He was to seize ships and

cross to some point on the coast of Narbonnese Gaul, whence he could rouse

the provinces of Gaul and the native German tribes, and thus raise forces for

a fresh outbreak of war.

 
Valens' departure having dispirited the troops at Ariminum, Cornelius Fuscus

advanced  his  force  and,  stationing  Liburnian  cruisers  along  the  adjoining

coast, invested the town by land and sea. The Flavians thus occupied the

Umbrian plain and the sea-board of Picenum; and the Apennines now divided

Italy between Vitellius and Vespasian. Valens, embarking from the Bay of

Pisa, was either becalmed on a slow sea or caught by an unfavourable wind

and had to put in at the harbour of Hercules Monoecus. Stationed in the

neighbourhood  was  Marius  Maturus,  the  Governor  of  the  Maritime  Alps,

who had remained loyal to Vitellius, and, though surrounded by enemies, had

so  far  been  faithful  to  his  oath  of  allegiance.  He  gave  Valens  a  friendly

welcome and strongly advised him not to venture rashly into Narbonnese

Gaul. This alarmed Valens, who found also that his companions' loyalty was

yielding to their fears.

 
For Valerius Paulinus, the imperial agent in the province, was an energetic

soldier who had been friendly with Vespasian in old days, and had lately

sworn all the surrounding communities to his cause. Having summoned to his

flag all the Guards discharged by Vitellius, who needed no persuasion to

resume the war, he was now holding the colony of Forum Julii, the key to the

command of the sea. His influence carried the more weight since Forum Julii

was his native town and, having once been an officer in the Guards, he was

respected by the men. Besides this, the inhabitants supported their fellow

citizen,  and  in  the  hope  of  future  aggrandizement  rendered  enthusiastic

service to the party. When the news of these efficient preparations, somewhat

exaggerated by rumour, came to the ears of the Vitellians, who were already

in some doubt, Fabius Valens returned to the ships with four men of the Body

Guard, three of his friends and three centurions, while Maturus and the rest

preferred to remain and swear allegiance to Vespasian. As for Valens, though

he felt safer at sea than among the cities on the coast, he was still full of

doubts for the future, since he was certain what he had to avoid but quite

uncertain  whom  he  could  trust.  Eventually  a  gale  drove  him  upon  the

Stoechades,  some  islands  belonging  to  Marseilles,  and  there  he  was

overtaken by the cruisers which Paulinus had sent in pursuit. 
 

 
                            The State of the Provinces

 
 

 
With  the  capture  of  Valens  the  tide  had  now  fully  turned  in  favour  of

Vespasian.  The  movement  had  been  begun  in  Spain  by  the  First  legion

Adjutrix,  whose  reverence  for  Otho's  memory  made  them  hate  Vitellius.

They carried the Tenth and the Sixth with them. The provinces of Gaul soon

followed suit. Britain was bound to his cause by the favour felt for one who

had been sent there by Claudius in command of the Second legion, and had

fought with great distinction in the war. But the adherence of the province

was  to  some  extent  opposed  by  the  other  legions,  in  which  many  of  the

centurions and soldiers had been promoted by Vitellius. They were used to

their emperor and felt some doubt about the change.

 
This  quarrel  between  the  legions  and  the  constant  rumours  of  civil  war,

encouraged the Britons to take heart. Their chief instigator was one Venutius.

He  was  of  a  ferocious  disposition  and  hated  the  name  of  Rome,  but  his

strongest motive was a private quarrel with Queen Cartimandua, a member of

a  powerful  family,  who  ruled  the  Brigantes.  Her  authority  had  lately

increased,  since  she  had  betrayed  King  Caratacus  into  the  hands  of  the

Romans, and was thus considered to have provided Claudius Caesar with

material for his triumph. Thus she had grown rich, and with prosperity came

demoralization. She threw over Venutius, who was her husband, and gave her

hand and kingdom to his squire, Vellocatus. This crime soon proved the ruin

of her house. The people supported her husband: she defended her lover with

passionate ferocity. Venutius therefore summoned assistance and, aided by

the  simultaneous  revolt  of  the  Brigantes,  brought  Cartimandua  into  dire

straits. She petitioned for troops from Rome. Our auxiliaries, both horse and

foot, then fought several engagements with varying success, but eventually

rescued the queen. Thus the kingdom was left in the hands of Venutius and

the war in ours.

 
Almost  simultaneously  a  disturbance  broke  out  in  Germany,  where  the

inefficiency of the generals, the disaffection of the troops, the strength of the

enemy,  and  the  treachery  of  our  allies  all  combined  to  bring  the  Romangovernment into serious danger. The causes and history of this protracted

struggle—for such it proved—we must leave to a later chapter. Amongst the

Dacians also there was trouble. They could never be trusted, and now that the

army was moved from Moesia they were no longer under the restraint of fear.

At first they remained quiet and awaited developments. But when they saw

Italy in the flames of war, and found the whole empire divided into hostile

camps, they fell upon the winter-quarters of the auxiliary infantry and cavalry

and began to occupy both banks of the Danube. They were on the point of

storming the Roman camp as well, when Mucianus, who knew of the victory

at Cremona, sent the Sixth legion against them. For the empire was in danger

of a double foreign invasion, if the Dacians and the Germans had broken in

from opposite directions. But here, as so often, Rome's good fortune saved

her by bringing Mucianus on the scene with the forces of the East just at the

moment when we had settled matters at Cremona. Fonteius Agrippa, who had

for the last year been pro-consul in Asia, was transferred to the government

of  Moesia.  His  forces  were  strengthened  by  a  draft  from  the  defeated

Vitellian army, for in the interest of peace it seemed prudent to distribute

these troops over the provinces and to keep their hands tied by a foreign war.

 
The other peoples soon made their voices heard. Pontus had suddenly risen in

a  general  rebellion  at  the  instigation  of  a  foreign  menial,  who  was  in

command of what had once been the royal fleet. He was one of Polemo's

freedmen, by name Anicetus, who had formerly been influential and resented

the change which had converted the kingdom into a province of the Roman

empire. He accordingly enlisted the maritime tribes of Pontus in Vitellius'

service, attracting all the neediest ruffians with promises of plunder. At the

head  of  no  mean  force  he  suddenly  fell  upon  Trapezus,  an  ancient  and

famous city, founded by Greek settlers on the frontier of the Pontic kingdom.

There he cut to pieces the auxiliaries, who had once formed the king's Body

Guard, and, after receiving the Roman franchise, had adopted our ensigns and

equipment, while still retaining all the inefficiency and insubordination of

Greek troops. Anicetus also set fire to the fleet and thus enjoyed complete

mastery of the sea, since Mucianus had moved the pick of his cruisers and all

his  troops  to  Byzantium.  The  sea  was  overrun  by  natives  too,  who  had

hurriedly  built  themselves  boats.  These,  which  they  call  'arks',  are  broad-

bottomed boats with low sides, built without any brass or iron rivets. In a

rough sea, as the waves rise higher and higher, the height of the sides israised by the addition of planks which, in the end, enclose the whole boat

under a sort of roof. They are thus left to toss up and down on the waves.

They have bows at both ends and the paddles can be used on either side,

since it is as easy and as safe to row in one direction as in the other.

 
This state of things attracting Vespasian's attention, he was obliged to send

out a picked force of detachments from the legions under Virdius Geminus, a

soldier of tried experience. He attacked the enemy while they were dispersed

in all directions in quest of plunder, and drove them back to their ships. He

then had some Liburnian cruisers hurriedly constructed and ran Anicetus to

ground in the mouth of the river Chobus, where he had taken refuge with the

King of the Sedochezi tribe, whose alliance he had purchased by bribes. At

first, indeed, the king endeavoured to protect his petitioner by using threats of

violence, but he soon saw that it was a choice between making war or being

paid for his treachery. The barbarian's sense of honour was unequal to this

strain. He came to terms, surrendered Anicetus and the other fugitives, and

thus put an end to 'the slaves' war'.

 
This  victory  delighted  Vespasian:  everything  was  succeeding  beyond  his

hopes: and to crown all the news of the battle of Cremona now reached him

in Egypt. He hurried forward all the faster towards Alexandria with the object

of bringing starvation upon Vitellius' defeated troops and the inhabitants of

Rome, who were already feeling the pinch of diminished imports. For he was

at the same time making preparations for an invasion of the adjacent province

of Africa by land and sea. By cutting off their corn supply he hoped to reduce

the enemy to famine and disunion.

 
 

 
                        Antonius' Advance from Cremona

 
 

 
Thus a world-wide convulsion marked the passing of the imperial power into

new hands. Meanwhile, after Cremona, the behaviour of Antonius Primus

was not so blameless as before. He had settled the war, he felt; the rest would

be plain sailing. Or, perhaps, in such a nature as his success only brought to

light his greed and arrogance and all his other dormant vices. While harrying

Italy like a conquered country, he courted the goodwill of his troops and usedevery word and every action to pave his way to power. He allowed his men to

appoint centurions themselves in place of those who had fallen, and thus gave

them a taste for insubordination; for their choice fell on the most turbulent

spirits. The generals no longer commanded the men, but were dragged at the

heels  of  their  caprices.  This  revolutionary  system,  utterly  fatal  to  good

discipline,  was  exploited  by  Antonius  for  his  own  profit.  Of  Mucianus'

approach he had no fears, and thus made a mistake even more fatal than

despising  Vespasian.  His  advance,  however,  continued.  As  winter  was  at

hand  and  the  Po  had  inundated  the  meadows,  his  column  marched

unencumbered by heavy baggage.

 
The main body of the victorious legions was left behind at Verona, together

with such of the soldiers as were incapacitated by wounds or old age, and

many besides who were still in good condition. Having already broken the

back of the campaign, Antonius felt strong enough with his auxiliary horse

and foot and some picked detachments from the legions. The Eleventh had

voluntarily  joined  the  advance.  They  had  held  back  at  first,  but,  seeing

Antonius' success, were distressed to think they had had no share in it. The

column was also accompanied by a force of six thousand Dalmatian troops,

which  had  been  recently  raised.  The  ex-consul,  Pompeius  Silvanus,

commanded the column, but the actual control was in the hands of a general

named  Annius  Bassus.  Silvanus  was  quite  ineffective  as  a  general,  and

wasted every chance of action in talking about it. Bassus, while showing all

due  respect,  managed  him  completely,  and  was  always  ready  with  quiet

efficiency  to  do  anything  that  had  to  be  done.  Their  force  was  further

increased by enlisting the best of the marines from the Ravenna fleet, who

were clamouring for service in the legions. The vacancies in the fleet were

filled by Dalmatians. The army and its generals halted at Fanum Fortunae,

still hesitating what policy to adopt, for they had heard that the Guards were

on the move from Rome, and supposed that the Apennines were held by

troops. And they had fears of their own. Supplies were scarce in a district

devastated by war. The men were mutinous and demanded 'shoe-money', as

they called the donative, with alarming insistence. No provision had been

made either for money or for stores. The precipitate greed of the soldiers

made further difficulties, for they each looted what might have served for

them all.

 
I  find  among  the  best  authorities  evidence  which  shows  how  wickedlycareless were the victorious army of all considerations of right and wrong.

They tell how a trooper professed that he had killed his brother in the last

battle, and demanded a reward from his generals. The dictates of humanity

forbade them to remunerate such a murder, but in the interests of civil war

they dared not punish it. They had put him off with the plea that they could

not at the moment reward his service adequately. And there the story stops.

However, a similar crime had occurred in earlier civil wars. In the battle

which Pompeius Strabo fought against Cinna at the Janiculum, one of his

soldiers  killed  his  own  brother  and  then,  realizing  what  he  had  done,

committed suicide. This is recorded by Sisenna. Our ancestors, it seems, had

a livelier sense than we have both of the glory of good deeds and the shame

of  bad.  These  and  other  such  instances  from  past  history  may  be

appropriately cited, whenever the subject seems to demand either an example

of good conduct or some consolation for a crime.

 
Antonius and his fellow generals decided to send the cavalry ahead to explore

the  whole  of  Umbria,  and  to  see  whether  any  of  the  Apennines  were

accessible by a gentler route; to summon the eagles and standards and all the

troops at Verona, and to fill the Po and the sea with provision ships. Some of

the generals continually suggested obstacles. Antonius had grown too big for

his  place,  and  they  had  surer  hopes  of  reward  from  Mucianus.  He  was

distressed that victory had come so soon, and felt that, if he was not present

when Rome was taken, he would lose his share in the war and its glory. So he

kept on writing to Antonius and Varus in ambiguous terms, sometimes urging

them to 'press forward on their path', sometimes expatiating on 'the manifold

value  of  delay'.  He  thus  managed  to  arrange  that  he  could  disclaim

responsibility in case of a reverse, or acknowledge their policy as his own if it

succeeded.  To  Plotius  Grypus,  whom  Vespasian  had  lately  raised  to

senatorial rank and put in command of a legion, and to his other trusty friends

he sent less ambiguous instructions, and they all wrote back criticizing the

haste with which Antonius and Varus acted. This was just what Mucianus

wanted. He forwarded the letters to Vespasian with the result that Antonius'

plans and exploits were not appreciated as highly as Antonius had hoped.

 
This he took very ill and threw the blame on Mucianus, whose charges he

conceived had cheapened his exploits. Being little accustomed to control his

tongue or to obey orders, he was most unguarded in his conversation and

composed a letter to Vespasian in presumptuous language which ill befitted asubject, making various covert charges against Mucianus. 'It was I,' he wrote,

'who brought the legions of Pannonia into the field: it was my stimulus which

stirred up the officers in Moesia: it was by my persistence that we broke

through the Alps, seized hold of Italy and cut off the German and Raetian

auxiliaries. When Vitellius' legions were all scattered and disunited, it was I

who flung the cavalry on them like a whirlwind, and then pressed home the

attack with the infantry all day and all night. That victory is my greatest

achievement and it is entirely my own. As for the mishap at Cremona, that

was the fault of the war. In old days the civil wars cost the country far more

damage and involved the destruction of more than one town. It is not with

couriers and dispatches that I serve my master, but with my sword in my

hand. Nor can it be said that I have interfered with the glory of the men who

have meanwhile settled matters in Dacia. What peace in Moesia is to them,

the safety and welfare of Italy are to me. It was my encouragement which

brought the provinces of Gaul and of Spain, the strongest parts of the whole

world, over to Vespasian's side. But my labours will prove useless, if the

reward for the dangers I have run is to fall to the man who was not there to

share  them.'  All  this  reached  the  ears  of  Mucianus  and  a  serious  quarrel

resulted.  Antonius  kept  it  up  in  a  frank  spirit  of  dislike,  while  Mucianus

showed a cunning which was far more implacable.

 
 

 
                          Vitellius' Measures of Defence

 
 

 
After the crushing defeat at Cremona Vitellius stupidly suppressed the news

of the disaster, thus postponing not the danger itself but only his precautions

against it. Had he admitted the facts and sought advice, hope and strength

were still left to him: his pretension that all went well only made matters

worse. He was himself extraordinarily silent about the war, and in Rome all

discussion of the subject was forbidden. This only increased the number of

people who, if permitted, would have told the truth, but in the face of this

prohibition spread grossly exaggerated rumours. Nor were the Flavian leaders

slow to foster these rumours. Whenever they captured Vitellian spies they

escorted  them  round  the  camp  to  show  them  the  strength  of  the  winning

army, and sent them back again. Vitellius cross-examined each of them inprivate and then had them murdered. A centurion named Julius Agrestis, after

many interviews, in which he endeavoured in vain to fire Vitellius' courage,

at last with heroic persistence induced the emperor to send him to inspect the

enemy's forces and discover what had really happened at Cremona. He made

no attempt to deceive Antonius by concealing the object of his mission, but

openly avowed the emperor's instructions, stated his intentions and demanded

to be shown everything. He was given guides, who showed him the field of

battle, the ruins of Cremona and the captured legions. Back went Agrestis to

Vitellius. Finding that the emperor disbelieved his report and even suggested

that he had been bribed, he said, 'You want some certain evidence and, since

you have no further use for me either alive or dead, I will give you evidence

that you can believe.' And he was as good as his word. He went straight from

the emperor's presence and committed suicide. Some say he was killed by

order of Vitellius, but they give the same account of his heroic devotion.

 
Vitellius was like a man roused from sleep. He dispatched Julius Priscus and

Alfenus Varus with fourteen cohorts of Guards and all his available cavalry

to hold the Apennines. A legion levied from the marines was sent after them.

This large army of picked men and horses, if there had been any general to

lead it, was strong enough to have even taken the offensive. His other cohorts

were given to his brother, Lucius Vitellius, for the protection of the city. The

emperor himself gave up none of his habitual luxuries, but, feeling nervous

and depressed, he hurried on the elections and nominated consuls for several

years in advance. He lavished special charters on allied communities and

extended Latin rights to foreign towns: he remitted taxation here, granted

immunities there. In fact, he took no thought for the future, and did his best to

cripple the empire. However, the mob accepted these munificent grants with

open mouths. Fools paid money for them, but wise men held them invalid,

since they could be neither given nor received without a revolution. At last he

yielded to the demands of the army and joined the camp at Mevania, where

they had taken up their position. A long train of senators followed him, many

moved by their ambition, but most by their fears. Here he was still undecided

and at the mercy of treacherous advice.

 
During one of his speeches a portent occurred. A cloud of ill-omened birds

flew over his head and its density obscured the daylight. To this was added

another omen of disaster. A bull broke from the altar, scattered the utensils

for the ceremony, and escaped so far away that it had to be killed instead ofbeing  sacrificed  according  to  the  proper  ritual.  But  the  chief  portent  was

Vitellius himself. He was ignorant of soldiering, incapable of forethought:

knew nothing of drill or scouting, or how far operations should be pressed

forward or protracted. He always had to ask some one else. At every fresh

piece of news his expression and gait betrayed his alarm. And then he would

get drunk. At last he found camp life too tedious, and on learning of a mutiny

in the fleet at Misenum he returned to Rome. Every fresh blow terrified him,

but of the real crisis he seemed insensible. For it was open to him to cross the

Apennines and with his full strength unimpaired to attack the enemy while

they were worn out with cold and hunger. But by breaking up his forces he

sent his keenest soldiers, stubbornly loyal to the last, to be killed or taken

prisoner. The more experienced of his centurions disapproved of this policy

and  would  have  told  him  the  truth,  if  they  had  been  consulted.  But  the

emperor's intimates refused them admittance. He had, indeed, formed a habit

of regarding wholesome advice as unpleasant, and refusing to listen to any

that was not agreeable, and in the long run fatal.

 
In civil war individual enterprise counts for much. The mutiny of the fleet at

Misenum had been engineered by Claudius Faventinus, a centurion whom

Galba had dismissed in disgrace. To obtain his object he had forged a letter

from  Vespasian  promising  rewards  for  treachery.  The  admiral,  Claudius

Apollinaris,  was  neither  a  staunch  loyalist  nor  an  enthusiastic  traitor.

Accordingly Apinius Tiro, an ex-praetor, who happened to be at Minturnae,

offered to take the lead of the rebels. They proceeded to win over the colonies

and  country  towns.  Puteoli  in  particular  was  strong  for  Vespasian,  while

Capua remained loyal to Vitellius, for they dragged their local jealousies into

the civil war. To pacify the excited troops Vitellius chose Claudius Julianus,

who had lately been in command of the fleet at Misenum and had allowed lax

discipline. To support him he was given one cohort of the city garrison and

the force of gladiators already serving under him. The two parties encamped

close  to  one  another,  and  it  was  not  long  before  Julianus  came  over  to

Vespasian's  side.  They  then  joined  forces  and  occupied  Tarracina,  which

owed its strength more to its walls and situation than to the character of its

new garrison.

 
When news of this reached Vitellius, he left part of his force at Narnia with

the prefects of the Guard, and sent his brother Lucius with six regiments of

Guards  and  five  hundred  horse  to  cope  with  the  threatened  outbreak  inCampania.  His  own  nervous  depression  was  somewhat  relieved  by  the

enthusiasm  of  the  troops  and  of  the  populace,  who  clamoured  loudly  for

arms. For he dignified this poor-spirited mob, which would never dare to do

anything but shout, by the specious titles of 'the army' or 'his legions'. His

friends were all untrustworthy in proportion to their eminence; but on the

advice of his freedmen he held a levy for conscription and swore in all who

gave  their  names.  As  their  numbers  were  too  great,  he  gave  the  task  of

selection to the two consuls. From each of the senators he levied a fixed

number of slaves and a weight of silver. The knights offered money and

personal service, while even freedmen volunteered similar assistance. Indeed,

protestations of loyalty prompted by fear, had gradually changed into real

sympathy. People began to feel pity, not perhaps so much for Vitellius as for

the throne and its misfortunes. He himself by his looks, his voice, his tears

made ceaseless demands upon their compassion, promising rewards lavishly

and, as men do when they are frightened, beyond all limits. He had hitherto

refused the title of Caesar, but he now expressed a wish for it. He had a

superstitious respect for the name, and in moments of terror one listens as

much to gossip as to sound advice. However, while a rash and ill-conceived

undertaking  may  prosper  at  the  outset,  in  time  it  always  begins  to  flag.

Gradually the senators and knights deserted him. At first they hesitated and

waited till his back was turned, but soon they ceased to care and openly

showed their disrespect. At last Vitellius grew ashamed of the failure of his

efforts and excused them from the services which they refused to render.

 
 

 
                          The Passage of the Apennines

 
 

 
The occupation of Mevania had terrified Italy with the prospect of a revival

of the war, but Vitellius' cowardly retreat sensibly strengthened the popularity

of  the  Flavian  party.  The  Samnites,  Pelignians,  and  Marsians  were  now

induced to rise. They were jealous of Campania for stealing a march on them,

and the change of masters, as so often happens, made them perform all their

military  duties  with  the  utmost  alacrity.  But  in  crossing  the  Apennines

Antonius' army suffered severely from the rough December weather. Though

they met with no opposition, they found it hard enough to struggle throughthe snow, and realized what danger they would have had to face if Vitellius

had not happened to turn back. Certainly chance helped the Flavian generals

quite as often as their own strategy. Here they came across Petilius Cerialis,

who had been enabled by his knowledge of the country to elude Vitellius'

outposts, disguised as a peasant. As he was a near relative of Vespasian and a

distinguished soldier he was given a place on the staff. Several authorities say

that Flavius Sabinus and Domitian were also afforded facilities for escape,

and that Antonius sent messengers who contrived by various devices to get

through to them, and made arrangements for an interview and safe conduct.

Sabinus, however, pleaded that his health was unequal to the fatigue of such a

bold step. Domitian was quite ready to venture, but although the guards to

whom Vitellius had entrusted him, promised that they would share his flight,

he  was  afraid  they  might  be  laying  a  trap  for  him.  As  a  matter  of  fact,

Vitellius was too anxious for the safety of his own relatives to plot any harm

against Domitian.

 
Arrived at Carsulae the Flavian generals took a few days' rest and awaited the

arrival of the main legionary force. The place suited them admirably for an

encampment.  It  commanded  a  wide  view,  and  with  so  many  prosperous

towns in the rear their supplies were safe. The Vitellians too, were only ten

miles  away,  and  they  had  hopes  of  negotiating  treason  with  them.  The

soldiers chafed at this delay, preferring victory to peace. They did not even

want to wait for their own legions, for there would be more plunder than

danger to share with them. Antonius accordingly summoned a meeting of the

men and explained to them that Vitellius still had troops at his command.

Reflection might make them waver, despair would steel their hearts. In civil

war, he told them, the first steps may be left to chance, nothing but careful

strategy  can  win  the  final  victory.  The  fleet  at  Misenum  and  the  richest

districts of Campania had already deserted Vitellius, and in the whole world

nothing  was  left  to  him  now  except  the  country  between  Narnia  and

Tarracina. The battle of Cremona had brought them credit enough, and the

destruction of the town more than enough discredit. Their desire must be not

to take Rome but to save it. They would gain richer rewards and far more

glory if they could show that they had saved the senate and people of Rome

without shedding a drop of blood. Such considerations as these calmed their

excitement, and it was not long before the legions arrived.

 
Alarmed at the repute of this augmented army, Vitellius' Guards began towaver. There was no one to encourage them to fight, while many urged them

to  desert,  being  eager  to  hand  over  their  companies  or  squadrons  to  the

enemy and by such a gift to secure the victor's gratitude for the future. These

also let the Flavians know that the next camp at Interamna had a garrison of

four hundred cavalry. Varus was promptly sent off with a light marching

force, and the few who offered resistance were killed. The majority threw

away their arms and begged for quarter. Some escaped to the main camp and

spread  universal  panic  by  exaggerating  the  strength  and  prowess  of  the

enemy, in order to mitigate the disgrace of losing the fort. In the Vitellian

camp all offences went unpunished: desertion met with sure reward. Their

loyalty soon gave way and a competition in treachery began. Tribunes and

centurions  deserted  daily,  but  not  the  common  soldiers,  who  had  grown

stubbornly  faithful  to  Vitellius.  At  last,  however,  Priscus  and  Alfenus

abandoned the camp and returned to Vitellius, thus finally releasing all the

others from any obligation to blush for their treachery.

 
About the same time Fabius Valens was executed in his prison at Urbinum,

and his head was exhibited to Vitellius' Guards to show them that further

hope was vain. For they cherished a belief that Valens had made his way into

Germany, and was there mustering his old force and fresh troops as well.

This evidence of his death threw them into despair. The Flavian army was

vastly  inspirited  by  it  and  regarded  Valens'  death  as  the  end  of  the  war.

Valens had been born at Anagnia of an equestrian family. He was a man of

loose morality, not without intellectual gifts, who by indulging in frivolity

posed as a wit. In Nero's time he had acted in a harlequinade at the Juvenalian

Games. At first he pleaded compulsion, but afterwards he acted voluntarily,

and  his  performances  were  rather  clever  than  respectable.  Rising  to  the

command  of  a  legion,  he  supported  Verginius  and  then  defamed  his

character. He murdered Fonteius Capito, whose loyalty he had undermined—

or perhaps because he had failed to do so. He betrayed Galba and remained

faithful to Vitellius, a merit to which the treachery of others served as a foil.

 
Now that their hopes were crushed on all sides, the Vitellians prepared to go

over  to  the  enemy.  But  even  at  this  crisis  they  saved  their  honour  by

marching down with their standards and colours to the plains below Narnia,

where the Flavian army was drawn up in full armour ready for battle in two

deep lines on either side of the road. The Vitellians marched in between and

were  surrounded.  Antonius  then  spoke  to  them  kindly  and  told  them  toremain, some at Narnia and some at Interamna. He also left behind some of

the victorious legions, which were strong enough to quell any outbreak but

would not molest them so long as they remained quiet.

 
 

 
        The Abdication of Vitellius and the Burning of the Capitol

 
 

 
During these days Antonius and Varus kept sending messages to Vitellius, in

which they offered him his life, a gift of money, and the choice of a safe

retreat in Campania, if he would stop the war and surrender himself and his

children  to  Vespasian.  Mucianus  wrote  him  letters  to  the  same  effect.

Vitellius usually took these offers seriously and talked about the number of

slaves he would have and the choice of a seaside place. He had sunk, indeed,

into such mental torpor that, if other people had not remembered that he was

an emperor, he was certainly beginning to forget it himself.

 
However, it was to Flavius Sabinus, the City Prefect, that the leading men at

Rome addressed themselves. They urged him secretly not to lose all share in

the glory of victory. They pointed out that the City Garrison was under his

own command, and that he could count on the police and their own bands of

slaves, to say nothing of the good fortune of the party and all the advantage

that victory gives. He must not leave all the glory to Antonius and Varus.

Vitellius had nothing left but a few regiments of guards, who were seriously

alarmed at the bad news which came from every quarter. As for the populace,

their feelings soon changed, and if he put himself at their head, they would be

just as loud in their flattery of Vespasian. Vitellius himself could not even

cope with success, and disaster had positively paralysed him. The credit of

ending the war would go to the man who seized the city. It was eminently

fitting  that  Sabinus  should  secure  the  throne  for  his  brother,  and  that

Vespasian should hold him higher than any one else.

 
Age had enfeebled Sabinus, and he showed no alacrity to listen to such talk

as this. Some people covertly insinuated that he was jealous of his brother's

success and was trying to delay its realization. Flavius Sabinus was the elder

brother and, while they were both private persons, he had been the richer and

more  influential.  It  was  also  believed  that  he  had  been  chary  in  helpingVespasian to recover his financial position, and had taken a mortgage on his

house and estates. Consequently, though they remained openly friendly, there

were  suspicions  of  a  secret  enmity  between  them.  The  more  charitable

explanation is that Sabinus's gentle nature shrank from the idea of bloodshed

and massacre, and that this was his reason for so constantly discussing with

Vitellius the prospects of peace and a capitulation on terms. After several

interviews at his house they finally came to a settlement—so the report went

—at the Temple of Apollo. To the actual conversation there were only two

witnesses, Cluvius Rufus and Silius Italicus, but the expression of their faces

was  watched  from  a  distance.  Vitellius  was  said  to  look  abject  and

demoralized: Sabinus showed less sign of pride than of pity.

 
Had Vitellius found it no harder to persuade his friends than to make his own

renunciation,  Vespasian's  army  might  have  marched  into  Rome  without

bloodshed. But as it was, each of his friends in proportion to his loyalty

persisted in refusing terms of peace. They pointed to the danger and disgrace.

Would their conqueror keep his promises any longer than he liked? However

great  Vespasian's  self-confidence,  he  could  not  allow  Vitellius  to  live  in

private. Nor would the losers acquiesce: their very pity would be a menace.

'Of course,' they said, 'you are an old man. You have done with fortune, good

or  bad.  But  what  sort  of  repute  or  position  would  your  son  Germanicus

enjoy? At present they are promising you money and a household, and the

pleasant shores of Campania. But when once Vespasian has seized the throne,

neither he nor his friends nor even his army will feel their safety assured until

the rival claimant is dead. They imprisoned Fabius Valens and meant to make

use of him if a crisis occurred, but they found him too great an incubus. You

may be sure that Antonius and Fuscus and that typical representative of the

party, Mucianus, will have no choice but to kill you. Julius Caesar did not let

Pompey live unmolested, nor Augustus Antony.

 
Do you suppose that Vespasian's is a loftier disposition? Why, he was one of

your  father's  dependants,  when  your  father  was  Claudius's  colleague.  No,

think of your father's censorship, his three consulships, and all the honour

your great house has won. You must not disgrace them. Despair, at least,

should  nerve  your  courage.  The  troops  are  steadfast;  you  still  enjoy  the

people's favour. Indeed, nothing worse can happen to you than what we are

eager to face of our own free will. If we are defeated, we must die; if we

surrender, we must die. All that matters is whether we breathe our last amidmockery and insult or bravely and with honour.'

 
But Vitellius was deaf to all courageous counsel. His mind was obsessed with

pity for his wife and children, and an anxious fear that obstinate resistance

might make the conqueror merciless towards them. He had also a mother,

very old and infirm, but she had opportunely died a few days before and thus

forestalled the ruin of her house. All she had got out of her son's principate

was sorrow and a good name. On December 17 he heard the news that the

legion and the Guards at Narnia had deserted him and surrendered to the

enemy. He at once put on mourning and left the palace, surrounded by his

sorrowful household. His small son was carried in a little litter, as though this

had been his funeral. The populace uttered untimely flatteries: the soldiers

kept an ominous silence.

 
On that day there was no one so indifferent to the tragedy of human life as to

be unmoved by this spectacle. A Roman emperor, yesterday master of the

inhabited  world,  had  left  the  seat  of  his  authority,  and  was  now  passing

through the streets of the city, through the crowding populace, quitting the

throne. Such a sight had never been seen or heard of before. The dictator,

Caesar,  had  been  the  victim  of  sudden  violence;  Caligula  of  a  secret

conspiracy. Nero's had been a stealthy flight to some obscure country house

under cover of night. Piso and Galba might almost be said to have fallen on

the field of battle. But here was Vitellius—before the assembly of his own

people, his own soldiers around him, with women even looking on—uttering

a  few  sentences  suitable  to  his  miserable  situation.  He  said  it  was  in  the

interest of peace and of his country that he now resigned. He begged them

only to retain his memory in their hearts and to take pity on his brother, his

wife, and his little innocent children. As he said this, he held out his son to

them and commended him, now to individuals, now to the whole assembly.

At last tears choked his voice. Turning to the consul, Caecilius Simplex, who

was standing by, he unstrapped his sword and offered to surrender it as a

symbol  of  his  power  over  the  life  and  death  of  his  subjects.  The  consul

refused. The people in the assembly shouted 'No'. So he left them with the

intention of depositing the regalia in the Temple of Concord and then going

to  his  brother's  house.  But  he  was  faced  with  a  still  louder  uproar.  They

refused to let him enter a private house, and shouted to him to return to the

palace. They blocked every other way and only left the road leading into the

Via  Sacra  open.  Not  knowing  what  else  to  do,  Vitellius  returned  to  thepalace.

 
A rumour of his abdication had preceded him, and Flavius Sabinus had sent

written instructions to the Guards' officers to keep the men in hand. Thus the

whole empire seemed to have fallen into Vespasian's lap. The chief senators,

the majority of the knights, and the whole of the city garrison and the police

came flocking to the house of Flavius Sabinus. There they heard the news of

the  popular  enthusiasm  for  Vitellius  and  the  threatening  attitude  of  the

German Guards. But Sabinus had gone too far to draw back, and when he

showed hesitation, they all began to urge him to fight, each being afraid for

his own safety if the Vitellians were to fall on them when they were disunited

and consequently weaker. However, as so often happens on these occasions,

every one offered to give advice but few to share the danger. While Sabinus'

Body  Guard  were  marching  down  by  the  Fundane  reservoir  they  were

attacked  by  some  of  the  most  determined  Vitellians.  The  surprise  was

unpremeditated, but the Vitellians got the best of an unimportant skirmish. In

the  panic  Sabinus  chose  what  was  at  the  moment  the  safest  course,  and

occupied the summit of the Capitol, where his troops were joined by a few

senators  and  knights.  It  is  not  easy  to  record  their  names,  since  after

Vespasian's victory crowds of people claimed credit for this service to the

party. There were even some women who endured the siege, the most famous

of them being Verulana Gratilla, who had neither children nor relatives to

attract her, but only her love of danger.

 
The  Vitellians,  who  were  investing  them,  kept  a  half-hearted  watch,  and

Sabinus  was  thus  enabled  to  send  for  his  own  children  and  his  nephew

Domitian at dead of night, dispatching a courier by an unguarded route to tell

the Flavian generals that he and his men were under siege, and would be in

great  straits  unless  they  were  rescued.  All  night,  indeed,  he  was  quite

unmolested, and could have escaped with perfect safety. The Vitellian troops

could  face  danger  with  spirit,  but  were  much  too  careless  in  the  task  of

keeping guard; besides which a sudden storm of chilly rain interfered with

their sight and hearing.

 
At  daybreak,  before  the  two  sides  commenced  hostilities,  Sabinus  sent

Cornelius  Martialis,  who  had  been  a  senior  centurion,  to  Vitellius  with

instructions to complain that the conditions were being violated; that he had

evidently made a mere empty show of abdication, meant to deceive a numberof  eminent  gentlemen.  Else  why  had  he  gone  from  the  meeting  to  his

brother's  house,  which  caught  the  eye  from  a  conspicuous  position

overlooking the Forum, and not rather to his wife's on the Aventine. That was

the proper course for a private citizen, anxious to avoid all pretension to

supreme  authority.  But  no,  Vitellius  had  returned  to  the  palace,  the  very

stronghold of imperial majesty. From there he had launched a column of

armed men, who had strewn with innocent dead the most crowded quarter of

Rome, and even laid violent hands upon the Capitol. As for Sabinus himself,

the messenger was to say, he was only a civilian, a mere member of the

senate. While the issue was being decided between Vespasian and Vitellius

by  the  engagement  of  legions,  the  capture  of  towns,  the  capitulation  of

cohorts; even when the provinces of Spain, of Germany, of Britain, had risen

in revolt; he, though Vespasian's brother, had still remained faithful to his

allegiance,  until  Vitellius,  unasked,  began  to  invite  him  to  a  conference.

Peace and union, he was to remind him, serve the interest of the losers, and

only the reputation of the winners. If Vitellius regretted their compact, he

ought not to take arms against Sabinus, whom he had treacherously deceived,

and against Vespasian's son, who was still a mere boy. What was the good of

killing one youth and one old man? He ought rather to march out against the

legions and fight for the empire on the field. The result of the battle would

decide all other questions.

 
Greatly  alarmed,  Vitellius  replied  with  a  few  words  in  which  he  tried  to

excuse himself and throw the blame on his soldiers. 'I am too unassuming,' he

said, 'to cope with their overpowering impatience.' He then warned Martialis

to make his way out of the house by a secret passage, for fear that the soldiers

should kill him as an ambassador of the peace to which they were so hostile.

Vitellius himself was not in a position to issue orders or prohibitions; no

longer an emperor, merely an excuse for war.

 
Martialis had hardly returned to the Capitol when the furious soldiery arrived.

They had no general to lead them: each was a law to himself. Their column

marched at full speed through the Forum and past the temples overlooking it.

Then in battle order they advanced up the steep hill in front of them, until

they reached the lowest gates of the fortress on the Capitol. In old days there

was a series of colonnades at the side of this slope, on the right as you go up.

Emerging on to the roof of these, the besieged overwhelmed the Vitellians

with  showers  of  stones  and  tiles.  The  attacking  party  carried  nothing  butswords, and it seemed a long business to send for siege-engines and missiles.

So they flung torches into the nearest colonnade and, following in the wake

of the flames, would have burst through the burnt gates of the Capitol, if

Sabinus had not torn down all the available statues—the monuments of our

ancestors' glory—and built a sort of barricade on the very threshold. They

then tried to attack the Capitol by two opposite approaches, one near the

'Grove of Refuge' and the other by the hundred steps which lead up to the

Tarpeian Rock. This double assault came as a surprise. That by the Refuge

was the closer and more vigorous. Nothing could stop the Vitellians, who

climbed up by some contiguous houses built on to the side of the hill, which

in the days of prolonged peace had been raised to such a height that their

roofs were level with the floor of the Capitol. It is uncertain whether the

buildings at this point were fired by the assailants or—as tradition prefers—

by the besieged in trying to dislodge their enemies who had struggled up so

far. The fire spread to the colonnades adjoining the temples, and then the

'eagles' supporting the roof, which were made of very old wood, caught the

flames and fed them. And so the Capitol, with its doors fast shut, undefended

and unplundered, was burnt to the ground.

 
Since the foundation of the city no such deplorable and horrible disaster had

ever befallen the people of Rome. It was no case of foreign invasion. Had our

own wickedness allowed, the country might have been enjoying the blessings

of a benign Providence; and yet here was the seat of Jupiter Almighty—the

temple solemnly founded by our ancestors as the pledge of their imperial

greatness,  on  which  not  even  Porsenna,  when  Rome  surrendered,  nor  the

Gauls, when they took it, had ever dared to lay rash hands—being brought

utterly to ruin by the mad folly of two rival emperors! The Capitol had been

burnt before in civil war, but that was the crime of private persons. Now it

had been openly assaulted by the people of Rome and openly burnt by them.

And what was the cause of war? what the recompense for such a disaster?

Were we fighting for our country?

 
King Tarquinius Priscus had vowed to build this temple in the Sabine war,

and had laid the foundations on a scale that suited rather his hope of the city's

future greatness than the still moderate fortunes of the Roman people. Later

Servius Tullius, with the aid of Rome's allies, and Tarquinius Superbus, with

the spoils of the Volscians after the capture of Suessa Pometia, continued the

building. But the glory of completing it was reserved for the days of freedom.After the expulsion of the kings, Horatius Pulvillus, in his second consulship

dedicated this monument on such a magnificent scale, that in later days, with

all  her  boundless  wealth,  Rome  has  been  able  to  embellish  but  never  to

enlarge  it.  After  an  interval  of  four  hundred  and  fifteen  years,  in  the

consulship of Lucius Scipio and Caius Norbanus, it was burnt and rebuilt on

the same site. Sulla after his victory undertook the task of restoring it, but did

not  dedicate  it.  This  only  was  lacking  to  justify  his  title  of  'Fortune's

Favourite'.

 
Much as the emperors did to it, the name of Lutatius Catulus still remained

upon it up to the time of Vitellius. This was the temple that was now ablaze.

The besieged suffered more panic than their assailants. The Vitellian soldiers

lacked neither resource nor steadiness in moments of crisis. But on the other

side the troops were terrified, the general inert, and apparently so paralysed

that he was practically deaf and dumb. He neither adopted others' plans nor

formed any of his own, but only drifted about from place to place, attracted

by the shouts of the enemy, contradicting all his own orders. The result was

what  always  happens  in  a  hopeless  disaster:  everybody  gave  orders  and

nobody obeyed them. At last they threw away their weapons and began to

peer round for a way of escape or some means of hiding. Then the Vitellians

came bursting in, and with fire and sword made one red havoc. A few good

soldiers dared to show fight and were cut to pieces. Of these the most notable

were Cornelius Martialis, Aemilius Pacensis, Casperius Niger, and Didius

Scaeva.  Flavius  Sabinus,  who  stood  unarmed  and  making  no  attempt  to

escape,  was  surrounded  together  with  the  consul  Quintius  Atticus,  whose

empty title made him a marked man, as well as his personal vanity, which

had led him to distribute manifestoes full of compliments to Vespasian and

insults against Vitellius. The rest escaped by various means. Some disguised

themselves as slaves: some were sheltered by faithful dependants: some hid

among the baggage. Others again caught the Vitellians' password, by which

they recognized each other, and actually went about demanding it and giving

it when challenged, thus escaping under a cloak of effrontery.

 
When the enemy first broke in, Domitian had taken refuge with the sacristan,

and was enabled by the ingenuity of a freedman to escape among a crowd of

worshippers  in  a  linen  dress,  and  to  take  refuge  near  the  Velabrum  with

Cornelius Primus, one of his father's dependants. When his father came to the

throne, Domitian pulled down the sacristan's lodging and built a little chapelto Jupiter the Saviour with an altar, on which his adventures were depicted in

marble relief. Later, when he became emperor, he dedicated a huge temple to

Jupiter the Guardian with a statue of himself in the lap of the god. Sabinus

and Atticus were loaded with chains and taken to Vitellius, who received

them without any language or looks of disfavour, much to the chagrin of

those who wanted to see them punished with death and themselves rewarded

for their successful labours. When those who stood nearest started an outcry,

the dregs of the populace soon began to demand Sabinus' execution with

mingled threats and flatteries. Vitellius came out on to the steps of the palace

prepared to plead for him: but they forced him to desist. Sabinus was stabbed

and riddled with wounds: his head was cut off and the trunk dragged away to

the Ladder of Sighs. Such was the end of a man who certainly merits no

contempt. He had served his country for thirty-five years, and won credit

both as civilian and soldier. His integrity and fairness were beyond criticism.

He talked too much about himself, but this is the one charge which rumour

could hint against him in the seven years when he was Governor of Moesia,

and the twelve years during which he was Prefect of the City. At the end of

his life some thought he showed a lack of enterprise, but many believed him a

moderate man, who was anxious to save his fellow citizens from bloodshed.

In this, at any rate, all would agree, that before Vespasian became emperor

the reputation of his house rested on Sabinus. It is said that Mucianus was

delighted to hear of his murder, and many people maintained that it served

the interests of peace by putting an end to the jealousy of two rivals, one of

whom was the emperor's brother, while the other posed as his partner in the

empire.

 
When  the  people  further  demanded  the  execution  of  the  consul,  Vitellius

withstood them. He had forgiven Atticus, and felt that he owed him a favour,

for, when asked who had set fire to the Capitol, Atticus had taken the blame

on himself, by which avowal—or was it a well-timed falsehood?—he had

fixed all the guilt and odium on himself and exonerated the Vitellian party.

 
 

 
                            The Taking of Tarracina

 
 

 
About  this  same  time  Lucius  Vitellius,  who  had  pitched  his  camp  at  theTemple of Feronia, made every effort to destroy Tarracina, where he had shut

up the gladiators and sailors, who would not venture to leave the shelter of

the walls or to face death in the open. The gladiators were commanded, as we

have already seen, by Julianus, and the sailors by Apollinaris, men whose

dissolute inefficiency better suited gladiators than general officers. They set

no watch, and made no attempt to repair the weak places in the walls. Day

and night they idled loosely; the soldiers were dispatched in all directions to

find them luxuries; that beautiful coast rang with their revelry; and they only

spoke of war in their cups. A few days earlier, Apinius Tiro had started on his

mission, and, by rigorously requisitioning gifts of money in all the country

towns, was winning more unpopularity than assistance for the cause.

 
In the meantime, one of Vergilius Capito's slaves deserted to Lucius Vitellius,

and  promised  that,  if  he  were  provided  with  men,  he  would  put  the

abandoned  castle  into  their  hands.  Accordingly,  at  dead  of  night  he

established  a  few  lightly  armed  cohorts  on  the  top  of  the  hills  which

overlooked  the  enemy.  Thence  the  soldiers  came  charging  down  more  to

butchery  than  battle.  They  cut  down  their  victims  standing  helpless  and

unarmed or hunting for their weapons, or perhaps newly startled from their

sleep—all  in  a  bewildering  confusion  of  darkness,  panic,  bugle-calls,  and

savage cries. A few of the gladiators resisted and sold their lives dearly. The

rest rushed to the ships; and there the same panic and confusion reigned, for

the villagers were all mixed up with the troops, and the Vitellians slaughtered

them too, without distinction. Just as the first uproar began, six Liburnian

cruisers slipped away with the admiral Apollinaris on board. The rest were

either captured on the beach or overweighted and sunk by the crowds that

clambered over them. Julianus was taken to Lucius Vitellius, who had him

flogged  till  he  bled  and  then  killed  before  his  eyes.  Some  writers  have

accused Lucius Vitellius' wife, Triaria, of putting on a soldier's sword, and

with insolent cruelty showing herself among the horrors of the captured town.

Lucius himself sent a laurel-wreath to his brother in token of his success, and

inquired whether he wished him to return at once or to continue reducing

Campania. This delay saved not only Vespasian's party but Rome as well.

Had he marched on the city while his men were fresh from their victory, with

the flush of success added to their natural intrepidity, there would have been

a  tremendous  struggle,  which  must  have  involved  the  city's  destruction.

Lucius Vitellius, too, for all his evil repute, was a man of action. Good menowe their power to their virtues; but he was one of that worst sort whose

vices are their only virtue.

 
 

 
                  The Sack of Rome and the end of Vitellius

 
 

 
While  things  went  thus  on  Vitellius'  side,  the  Flavian  army  after  leaving

Narnia spent the days of the Saturnalian holiday quietly at Ocriculum. The

object of this disastrous delay was to wait for Mucianus. Antonius has been

suspected of delaying treacherously after receiving a secret communication

from Vitellius, offering him as the price of treason the consulship, his young

daughter, and a rich dowry. Others hold that this story was invented to gratify

Mucianus.  Many  consider  that  the  policy  of  all  the  Flavian  generals  was

rather to threaten the city than to attack it. They realized that Vitellius had

lost the best cohorts of his Guards, and now that all his forces were cut off

they  expected  he  would  abdicate.  But  this  prospect  was  spoilt  first  by

Sabinus' precipitation and then by his cowardice, for, after very rashly taking

arms, he failed to defend against three cohorts of Guards the strongly fortified

castle on the Capitol, which ought to have been impregnable even to a large

army. However, it is not easy to assign to any one man the blame which they

all  share.  Even  Mucianus  helped  to  delay  the  victors'  advance  by  the

ambiguity of his dispatches, and Antonius was also to blame for his untimely

compliance with instructions—or else for trying to throw the responsibility

on Mucianus. The other generals thought the war was over, and thus rendered

its final scene all the more appalling. Petilius Cerialis was sent forward with a

thousand cavalry to make his way by cross-roads through the Sabine country,

and enter the city by the Salarian road. But even he failed to make sufficient

haste, and at last the news of the siege of the Capitol brought them all at once

to their senses.

 
Marching up the Flaminian road, it was already deep night when Antonius

reached 'The Red Rocks'. His help had come too late. There he heard that

Sabinus  had  been  killed,  and  the  Capitol  burnt;  the  city  was  in  panic;

everything looked black; even the populace and the slaves were arming for

Vitellius. Petilius Cerialis, too, had been defeated in a cavalry engagement.

He had pushed on without caution, thinking the enemy already beaten, andthe Vitellians with a mixed force of horse and foot had caught him unawares.

The engagement had taken place near the city among farm buildings and

gardens and winding lanes, with which the Vitellians were familiar, while the

Flavians were terrified by their ignorance. Besides, the troopers were not all

of  one  mind;  some  of  them  belonged  to  the  force  which  had  recently

surrendered  at  Narnia,  and  were  waiting  to  see  which  side  won.  Julius

Flavianus, who commanded a regiment of cavalry, was taken prisoner. The

rest fell into a disgraceful panic and fled, but the pursuit was not continued

beyond Fidenae.

 
This success served to increase the popular excitement. The city rabble now

took arms. A few had service-shields: most of them snatched up any weapons

they  could  find  and  clamoured  to  be  given  the  sign  for  battle.  Vitellius

expressed his gratitude to them and bade them sally forth to protect the city.

He then summoned a meeting of the senate, at which envoys were appointed

to go to the two armies and urge them in the name of public welfare to accept

peace. The fortunes of the envoys varied. Those who approached Petilius

Cerialis found themselves in dire danger, for the soldiers indignantly refused

their terms. The praetor, Arulenus Rusticus, was wounded. Apart from the

wrong done to a praetor and an envoy, the man's own acknowledged worth

made this seem all the more scandalous. His companions were flogged, and

the lictor nearest to him was killed for venturing to make a way through the

crowd. Indeed, if the guard provided by the general had not intervened, a

Roman envoy, the sanctity of whose person even foreign nations respect,

might have been wickedly murdered in the mad rage of civil strife under the

very  walls  of  Rome.  Those  who  went  to  Antonius  met  with  a  more

reasonable reception; not that the soldiers were less violent, but the general

had more authority.

 
A knight named Musonius Rufus had attached himself to the envoys. He was

a student of philosophy and an enthusiastic advocate of Stoicism. He mingled

with  the  armed  soldiers  offering  them  advice  and  discoursing  on  the

advantages of peace and the perils of war. This amused many of them and

bored still more. Some, indeed, wanted to maul him and kick him out, but the

advice of the more sober spirits and the threats of others persuaded him to cut

short his ill-timed lecture. The Vestal Virgins, too, came in procession to

bring  Antonius  a  letter  from  Vitellius,  in  which  he  demanded  one  day's

postponement  of  the  final  crisis,  saying  that  everything  could  easily  besettled, if only they would grant this respite. Antonius sent the Virgins away

with all respect, and wrote in answer to Vitellius that the murder of Sabinus

and the burning of the Capitol had broken off all negotiations.

 
However, he summoned the legions to a meeting and endeavoured to mollify

them, proposing that they should pitch their camp near the Mulvian Bridge

and enter the city on the following day. His motive for delay was a fear that

the troops, when once their blood was up after a skirmish, would have no

respect for civilians or senators, or even for the temples and shrines of the

gods. But they suspected every postponement as a hindrance to their victory.

Moreover, some colours which were seen glittering along the hills, gave the

impression  of  a  hostile  force,  although  none  but  peaceful  citizens

accompanied them.

 
The  attack  was  made  in  three  columns.  One  advanced  from  its  original

position on the Flaminian road, one kept near the bank of the Tiber, and the

third approached the Colline Gate along the Salarian road. The cavalry rode

into the mob and scattered them. But the Vitellian troops faced the enemy,

themselves, too, in three separate divisions. Again and again they engaged

before the walls with varying success. But the Flavians had the advantage of

being well led and thus more often won success. Only one of the attacking

parties suffered at all severely, that which had made its way along narrow,

greasy lanes to Sallust's Gardens on the left side of the city. Standing on the

garden walls, the Vitellians hurled stones and javelins down upon them and

held them back until late in the day. But at last the cavalry forced an entrance

by the Colline Gate and took the defenders in the rear. Then the opposing

forces met on the Martian Plain itself. Fortune favoured the Flavians and the

sense of victories won. The Vitellians charged in sheer despair, but, though

driven back, they gathered again in the city.

 
The people came and watched the fighting, cheering and applauding now one

side, now the other, like spectators at a gladiatorial contest. Whenever one

side gave ground, and the soldiers began to hide in shops or seek refuge in

some private house, they clamoured for them to be dragged out and killed,

and thus got the greater part of the plunder for themselves: for while the

soldiers were busy with the bloody work of massacre, the spoil fell to the

crowd. The scene throughout the city was hideous and terrible: on the one

side fighting and wounded men, on the other baths and restaurants: here layheaps of bleeding dead, and close at hand were harlots and their companions

—all the vice and licence of luxurious peace, and all the crime and horror of a

captured town. One might well have thought the city mad with fury and mad

with pleasure at the same time. Armies had fought in the city before this,

twice when Sulla mastered Rome, once under Cinna. Nor were there less

horrors then. What was now so inhuman was the people's indifference. Not

for one minute did they interrupt the life of pleasure. The fighting was a new

amusement for their holiday. Caring nothing for either party, they enjoyed

themselves in riotous dissipation and took a frank pleasure in their country's

disaster.

 
The storming of the Guards' camp was the most troublesome task. It was still

held by some of the bravest as a forlorn hope, which made the victors all the

more  eager  to  take  it,  especially  those  who  had  originally  served  in  the

Guards. They employed against it every means ever devised for the storming

of  the  most  strongly  fortified  towns,  a  'tortoise',  artillery,  earthworks,

firebrands. This, they cried, was the crown of all the toil and danger they had

undergone in all their battles. They had restored the city to the senate and

people of Rome, and their Temples to the gods: the soldier's pride is his

camp, it is his country and his home. If they could not regain it at once, they

must spend the night in fighting. The Vitellians, for their part, had numbers

and fortune against them, but by marring their enemy's victory, by postponing

peace, by fouling houses and altars with their blood, they embraced the last

consolations that the conquered can enjoy. Many lay more dead than alive on

the towers and ramparts of the walls and there expired. When the gates were

torn down, the remainder faced the conquerors in a body. And there they fell,

every man of them facing the enemy with all his wounds in front. Even as

they died they took care to make an honourable end.

 
When the city was taken, Vitellius left the Palace by a back way and was

carried in a litter to his wife's house on the Aventine. If he could lie hid

during the day, he hoped to make his escape to his brother and the Guards at

Tarracina. But it is in the very nature of terror that, while any course looks

dangerous,  the  present  state  of  things  seems  worst  of  all.  His  fickle

determination  soon  changed  and  he  returned  to  the  vast,  deserted  Palace,

whence even the lowest of his menials had fled, or at least avoided meeting

him. Shuddering at the solitude and hushed silence of the place, he wandered

about, trying closed doors, terrified to find the rooms empty; until at last,wearied with his miserable search, he crept into some shameful hiding-place.

There Julius Placidus, an officer of the Guards, found him and dragged him

out. His hands were tied behind his back, his clothes were torn, and thus he

was led forth—a loathly spectacle at which many hurled insults and no one

shed a single tear of pity. The ignominy of his end killed all compassion. On

the way a soldier of the German army either aimed an angry blow at him, or

tried to put him out of his shame, or meant, perhaps, to strike the officer in

command;  at  any  rate,  he  cut  off  the  officer's  ear  and  was  immediately

stabbed.

 
With the points of their swords they made Vitellius hold up his head and face

their insults, forcing him again and again to watch his own statues hurtling

down, or to look at the Rostra and the spot where Galba had been killed. At

last he was dragged along to the Ladder of Sighs, where the body of Flavius

Sabinus had lain. One saying of his which was recorded had a ring of true

nobility. When some officer flung reproaches at him, he answered, 'And yet I

was once your emperor.' After that he fell under a shower of wounds, and

when he was dead the mob abused him as loudly as they had flattered him in

his lifetime—and with as little reason.

 
Vitellius' home was at Luceria. He was in his fifty-seventh year, and had won

the consulship, priesthoods, and a name and position among Rome's greatest

men, all of which he owed to no efforts of his own, but solely to his father's

eminence. Those who offered him the throne had not yet learnt to know him;

and yet his slothful cowardice won from his soldiers an enthusiasm which the

best of generals have rarely evoked. Still he had the qualities of candour and

generosity, which without moderation are liable to prove disastrous. He had

few friends, though he bought many, thinking to keep them, not by showing

moral stamina, but by giving liberal presents. It was indubitably good for the

country  that  Vitellius  should  be  beaten.  But  those  who  betrayed  him  to

Vespasian can hardly make a merit of their perfidy, for they were the very

men who had deserted Galba for Vitellius.

 
The day was already sinking into evening. The magistrates and senators had

fled in terror from the city, or were still in hiding at dependants' houses: it

was therefore impossible to call a meeting of the senate. When all fear of

violence  was  at  an  end,  Domitian  came  out  and  presented  himself  to  the

generals of his party. The crowds of soldiers at once hailed him as Caesar,and marched off, still in full armour, to escort him to his father's house.

  
                                      BOOK IV 
                        Rome after the Fall of Vitellius

 
                              (January-July, a.d. 70)

 
The death of Vitellius ended the war without inaugurating peace. The victors

remained under arms, and the defeated Vitellians were hunted through the

city  with  implacable  hatred,  and  butchered  promiscuously  wherever  they

were found. The streets were choked with corpses; squares and temples ran

with blood. Soon the riot knew no restraint; they began to hunt for those who

were  in  hiding  and  to  drag  them  out.  All  who  were  tall  and  of  youthful

appearance, whether soldiers or civilians, were cut down indiscriminately.

While their rage was fresh they sated their savage cravings with blood; then

suddenly the instinct of greed prevailed. On the pretext of hunting for hidden

enemies, they would leave no door unopened and regard no privacy. Thus

they  began  to  rifle  private  houses  or  else  made  resistance  an  excuse  for

murder. There were plenty of needy citizens, too, and of rascally slaves, who

were perfectly ready to betray wealthy householders: others were indicated

by their friends. From all sides came cries of mourning and misery. Rome

was like a captured city. People even longed to have the insolent soldiery of

Otho and Vitellius back again, much as they had been hated. The Flavian

generals,  who  had  fanned  the  flame  of  civil  war  with  such  energy,  were

incapable of using their victory temperately. In riot and disorder the worst

characters take the lead; peace and quiet call for the highest qualities.

 
Domitian having secured the title and the official residence of a Caesar, did

not as yet busy himself with serious matters, but in his character of emperor's

son devoted himself to dissolute intrigues. Arrius Varus took command of the

Guards, but the supreme authority rested with Antonius Primus. He removed

money and slaves from the emperor's house as though he were plundering

Cremona. The other generals, from excess of modesty or lack of spirit, shared

neither the distinctions of the war nor the profits of peace.

 
People in Rome were now so nervous and so resigned to despotism that they

demanded that Lucius Vitellius and his force of Guards should be surprised

on their way back from Tarracina, and the last sparks of the war stamped out.

Some cavalry were sent forward to Aricia, while the column of the legions

halted  short  of  Bovillae.  Vitellius,  however,  lost  no  time  in  surrendering

himself and his Guards to the conqueror's discretion, and the men flung awaytheir unlucky swords more in anger than in fear. The long line of prisoners

filed  through  the  city  between  ranks  of  armed  guards.  None  looked  like

begging for mercy. With sad, set faces they remained sternly indifferent to

the applause or the mockery of the ribald crowd. A few tried to break away,

but were surrounded and overpowered. The rest were put in prison. Not one

of them gave vent to any unseemly complaint. Through all their misfortunes

they  preserved  their  reputation  for  courage.  Lucius  Vitellius  was  then

executed. He was as weak as his brother, though during the principate he

showed himself less indolent. Without sharing his brother's success, he was

carried away on the flood of his disaster.

 
At this time Lucilius Bassus was sent off with a force of light horse to quell

the disquiet in Campania, which was caused more by the mutual jealousy of

the townships than by any opposition to the emperor. The sight of the soldiers

restored order. The smaller colonies were pardoned, but at Capua the Third

legion was left in winter quarters and some of the leading families fined.

Tarracina, on the other hand, received no relief. It is always easier to requite

an injury than a service: gratitude is a burden, but revenge is found to pay.

Their only consolation was that one of Vergilius Capito's slaves, who had, as

we have seen, betrayed the town, was hanged on the gallows with the very

rings on his fingers which Vitellius had given him to wear.

 
At Rome the senate decreed to Vespasian all the usual prerogatives of the

principate. They were now happy and confident. Seeing that the civil war had

broken out in the provinces of Gaul and Spain, and after causing a rebellion

first in Germany and then in Illyricum, had spread to Egypt, Judaea, Syria,

and in fact to all the provinces and armies of the empire, they felt that the

world had been purged as by fire and that all was now over. Their satisfaction

was still further enhanced by a letter from Vespasian, which at first sight

seemed to be phrased as if the war was still going on. Still his tone was that

of an emperor, though he spoke of himself as a simple citizen and gave his

country all the glory. The senate for its part showed no lack of deference.

They  decreed  that  Vespasian  himself  should  be  consul  with  Titus  for  his

colleague, and on Domitian they conferred the praetorship with the powers of

a consul.

 
Mucianus had also addressed a letter to the senate which gave rise to a good

deal of talk. If he were a private citizen, why adopt the official tone? Hecould have expressed the same opinions a few days later from his place in the

House.  Besides,  his  attack  on  Vitellius  came  too  late  to  prove  his

independence, and what seemed particularly humiliating for the country and

insulting to the emperor was his boast that he had held the empire in the

hollow of his hand, and had given it to Vespasian. However, they concealed

their ill-will and made a great show of flattery, decreeing to Mucianus in the

most complimentary terms full triumphal honours, which were really given

him for his success against his fellow countrymen, though they trumped up

an expedition to Sarmatia as a pretext. On Antonius Primus they conferred

the  insignia  of  the  consulship,  and  those  of  the  praetorship  on  Cornelius

Fuscus and Arrius Varus. Then came the turn of the gods: it was decided to

restore the Capitol. These proposals were all moved by the consul-designate,

Valerius Asiaticus. The others signified assent by smiling and holding up

their hands, though a few, who were particularly distinguished, or especially

practised in the art of flattery, delivered set speeches. When it came to the

turn  of  Helvidius  Priscus,  the  praetor-designate,  he  expressed  himself  in

terms which, while doing honour to a good emperor, were perfectly frank and

honest. The senate showed their keen approval, and it was this day which first

won for him great disfavour and great distinction.

 
Since I have had occasion to make a second allusion to a man whom I shall

often have to mention again, it may be well to give here a brief account of his

character and ideals, and of his fortune in life. Helvidius Priscus came from

the country town of Cluviae. His father had been a senior centurion in the

army. From his early youth Helvidius devoted his great intellectual powers to

the  higher  studies,  not  as  many  people  do,  with  the  idea  of  using  a

philosopher's reputation as a cloak for indolence, but rather to fortify himself

against  the  caprice  of  fortune  when  he  entered  public  life.  He  became  a

follower of that school of philosophy which holds that honesty is the one

good thing in life and sin the only evil, while power and rank and other such

external things, not being qualities of character, are neither good nor bad. He

had risen no higher than the rank of quaestor when Paetus Thrasea chose him

for his son-in-law, and of Thrasea's virtues he absorbed none so much as his

independence.  As  citizen,  senator,  husband,  son-in-law,  friend,  in  every

sphere of life he was thoroughly consistent, always showing contempt for

money, stubborn persistence in the right, and courage in the face of danger.

 
Some  people  thought  him  too  ambitious,  for  even  with  philosophers  thepassion  for  fame  is  often  their  last  rag  of  infirmity.  After  Thrasea's  fall

Helvidius was banished, but he returned to Rome under Galba and proceeded

to prosecute Eprius Marcellus, who had informed against his father-in-law.

This attempt to secure a revenge, as bold as it was just, divided the senate

into two parties, for the fall of Marcellus would involve the ruin of a whole

army of similar offenders. At first the struggle was full of recrimination, as

the famous speeches on either side testify; but after a while, finding that

Galba's attitude was doubtful and that many of the senators begged him to

desist, Helvidius dropped the prosecution. On his action in this matter men's

comments varied with their character, some praising his moderation, others

asking what had become of his tenacity.

 
To return to the senate: at the same meeting at which they voted powers to

Vespasian they also decided to send a deputation to address him. This gave

rise to a sharp dispute between Helvidius Priscus and Eprius Marcellus. The

former  thought  the  members  of  the  deputation  ought  to  be  nominated  by

magistrates acting under oath; Marcellus demanded their selection by lot. The

consul-designate  had  already  spoken  in  favour  of  the  latter  method,  but

Marcellus' motive was personal vanity, for he was afraid that if others were

chosen he would seem slighted. Their exchange of views gradually grew into

a  formal  and  acrimonious  debate.  Helvidius  inquired  why  it  was  that

Marcellus was so afraid of the magistrates' judgement, seeing that he himself

had great advantages of wealth and of eloquence over many others. Could it

be the memory of his misdeeds that so oppressed him? The fall of the lot

could not discern character: but the whole point of submitting people to the

vote and to scrutiny by the senate was to get at the truth about each man's life

and reputation. In the interest of the country, and out of respect to Vespasian,

it was important that he should be met by men whom the senate considered

beyond  reproach,  men  who  would  give  the  emperor  a  taste  for  honest

language. Vespasian had been a friend of Thrasea, Soranus, and Sentius, and

even though there might be no need to punish their prosecutors, still it would

be wrong to put them forward. Moreover, the senate's selection would be a

sort of hint to the emperor whom to approve and whom to avoid. 'Good

friends are the most effective instruments of good government. Marcellus

ought to be content with having driven Nero to destroy so many innocent

people. Let him enjoy the impunity and the profit he has won from that, and

leave Vespasian to more honest advisers.' 
Marcellus replied that the opinion which was being impugned was not his

own.  The  consul-designate  had  already  advised  them  to  follow  the

established precedent, which was that deputations should be chosen by lot, so

that there should be no room for intrigue or personal animosity. Nothing had

happened to justify them in setting aside such an ancient system. Why turn a

compliment to the emperor into a slight upon some one else? Anybody could

do homage. What they had to avoid was the possibility that some people's

obstinacy  might  irritate  the  emperor  at  the  outset  of  his  reign,  while  his

intentions were undecided and he was still busy watching faces and listening

to what was said. 'I have not forgotten,' he went on, 'the days of my youth or

the constitution which our fathers and grandfathers established. But while

admiring a distant past, I support the existing state of things. I pray for good

emperors, but I take them as they come. As for Thrasea, it was not my speech

but the senate's verdict which did for him. Nero took a savage delight in

farces like that trial, and, really, the friendship of such an emperor cost me as

much anxiety as banishment did to others. In fine, Helvidius may be as brave

and as firm as any Brutus or Cato; I am but a senator and we are all slaves

together. Besides, I advise my friend not to try and get an upper hand with

our emperor or to force his tuition on a man of ripe years, who wears the

insignia of a triumph and is the father of two grown sons. Bad rulers like

absolute sovereignty, and even the best of them must set some limit to their

subjects' independence.'

 
This heated interchange of arguments found supporters for both views. The

party which wanted the deputies chosen by lot eventually prevailed, since

even the moderates were anxious to observe the precedent, and all the most

prominent members tended to vote with them, for fear of encountering ill-

feeling  if  they  were  selected.  This  dispute  was  followed  by  another.  The

Praetors, who in those days administered the Treasury, complained of the

spread  of  poverty  in  the  country  and  demanded  some  restriction  of

expenditure. The consul-designate said that, as the undertaking would be so

vast  and  the  remedy  so  difficult,  he  was  in  favour  of  leaving  it  for  the

emperor.  Helvidius  maintained  that  it  ought  to  be  settled  by  the  senate's

decision. When the consuls began to take each senator's opinion, Vulcacius

Tertullinus, one of the tribunes, interposed his veto, on the ground that they

could  not  decide  such  an  important  question  in  the  emperor's  absence.

Helvidius had previously moved that the Capitol should be restored at thepublic cost, and with the assistance of Vespasian. The moderates all passed

over this suggestion in silence and soon forgot it, but there were others who

took care to remember it.

 
It was at this time that Musonius Rufus brought an action against Publius

Celer  on  the  ground  that  it  was  only  by  perjury  that  he  had  secured  the

conviction of Soranus Barea. It was felt that this trial restarted the hue and

cry  against  professional  accusers.  But  the  defendant  was  a  rascal  of  no

importance who could not be sheltered, and, moreover, Barea's memory was

sacred.  Celer  had  set  up  as  a  teacher  of  philosophy  and  then  committed

perjury  against  his  pupil  Barea,  thus  treacherously  violating  the  very

principles of friendship which he professed to teach. The case was put down

for the next day's meeting. But now that a taste for revenge was aroused,

people were all agog to see not so much Musonius and Publius as Priscus and

Marcellus and the rest in court.

 
Thus the senate quarrelled; the defeated party nursed their grievances; the

winners had no power to enforce their will; law was in abeyance and the

emperor  absent.  This  state  of  things  continued  until  Mucianus  arrived  in

Rome and took everything into his own hands. This shattered the supremacy

of Antonius and Varus, for, though Mucianus tried to show a friendly face

towards them, he was not very successful in concealing his dislike. But the

people of Rome, having acquired great skill in detecting strained relations,

had already transferred their allegiance. Mucianus was now the sole object of

their flattering attentions. And he lived up to them. He surrounded himself

with an armed escort, and kept changing his house and gardens. His display,

his public appearances, the night-watch that guarded him, all showed that he

had adopted the style of an emperor while forgoing the title. The greatest

alarm was aroused by his execution of Calpurnius Galerianus, a son of Caius

Piso.  He  had  attempted  no  treachery,  but  his  distinguished  name  and

handsome presence had made the youth a subject of common talk, and the

country was full of turbulent spirits who delighted in revolutionary rumours

and idly talked of his coming to the throne. Mucianus gave orders that he

should  be  arrested  by  a  body  of  soldiers,  and  to  avoid  a  conspicuous

execution in the heart of the city, they marched him forty miles along the

Appian road, where they severed his veins and let him bleed to death. Julius

Priscus, who had commanded the Guards under Vitellius, committed suicide,

more from shame than of necessity. Alfenus Varus survived the disgrace ofhis cowardice. Asiaticus, who was a freedman, paid for his malign influence

by dying the death of a slave.

 
 

 
                      The Revolt of Civilis and the Batavi

 
 

 
The growing rumour of a reverse in Germany had not as yet caused any

alarm  in  Rome.  People  alluded  to  the  loss  of  armies,  the  capture  of  the

legions' winter quarters, the defection of the Gallic provinces as matters of

indifference. I must now go back and explain the origin of this war, and of

the widespread rebellion of foreign and allied tribes which now broke into

flame.

 
The Batavi were once a tribe of the Chatti, living on the further bank of the

Rhine. But an outbreak of civil war had driven them across the river, where

they settled in a still unoccupied district on the frontier of Gaul and also in

the neighbouring island, enclosed on one side by the ocean and on the other

three sides by the Rhine. There they fared better than most tribes who ally

themselves to a stronger power. Their resources are still intact, and they have

only to contribute men and arms for the imperial army. After a long training

in the German wars, they still further increased their reputation in Britain,

where their troops had been sent, commanded according to an ancient custom

by  some  of  the  noblest  chiefs.  There  still  remained  behind  in  their  own

country  a  picked  troop  of  horsemen  with  a  peculiar  knack  of  swimming,

which enabled them to make a practice of crossing the Rhine with unbroken

ranks without losing control of their horses or their weapons.

 
Of their chieftains two outshone the rest. These were Julius Paulus and Julius

Civilis, both of royal stock. Paulus had been executed by Fonteius Capito on

a false charge of rebellion. On the same occasion Civilis was sent in chains to

Nero. Galba, however, set him free, and under Vitellius he again ran great

risk of his life, when the army clamoured for his execution. This gave him a

motive for hating Rome, and our misfortunes fed his hopes. He was, indeed,

far cleverer than most barbarians, and professed to be a second Sertorius or

Hannibal, because they all three had the same physical defect. He was afraid

that if he openly rebelled against the Roman people they would treat him asan enemy, and march on him at once, so he pretended to be a keen supporter

of Vespasian's party. This much was true, that Antonius Primus had written

instructing him to divert the auxiliaries whom Vitellius had summoned, and

to  delay  the  legions  on  the  pretence  of  a  rising  in  Germany.  Moreover,

Hordeonius Flaccus had given him the same advice in person, for Flaccus

was inclined to support Vespasian and anxious for the safety of Rome, which

was threatened with utter disaster, if the war were to break out afresh and all

these thousands of troops come pouring into Italy.

 
Having thus made up his mind to rebel, Civilis concealed in the meantime his

ulterior design, and while intending to guide his ultimate policy by future

events, proceeded to initiate the rising as follows. The young Batavians were

by  Vitellius'  orders  being  pressed  for  service,  and  this  burden  was  being

rendered  even  more  irksome  than  it  need  have  been  by  the  greed  and

depravity of the recruiting officers. They took to enrolling elderly men and

invalids so as to get bribes for excusing them: or, as most of the Batavi are

tall and good-looking in their youth, they would seize the handsomest boys

for immoral purposes. This caused bad feeling; an agitation was organized,

and they were persuaded to refuse service. Accordingly, on the pretext of

giving a banquet, Civilis summoned the chief nobles and the most determined

of the tribesmen to a sacred grove. Then, when he saw them excited by their

revelry and the late hour of the night, he began to speak of the glorious past

of the Batavi and to enumerate the wrongs they had suffered, the injustice

and extortion and all the evils of their slavery. 'We are no longer treated,' he

said, 'as we used to be, like allies, but like menials and slaves. Why, we are

never even visited by an imperial Governor —irksome though the insolence

of his staff would be. We are given over to prefects and centurions; and when

these subordinates have had their fill of extortion and of bloodshed, they

promptly find some one to replace them, and then there are new pockets to

fill and new pretexts for plunder. Now conscription is upon us: children are to

be torn from parents, brother from brother, never, probably, to meet again.

And yet the fortunes of Rome were never more depressed. Their cantonments

contain nothing but loot and a lot of old men. Lift up your eyes and look at

them. There is nothing to fear from legions that only exist on paper. And we

are strong. We have infantry and cavalry: the Germans are our kinsmen: the

Gauls share our ambition. Even the Romans will be grateful if we go to war.

If we fail, we can claim credit for supporting Vespasian: if we succeed, therewill be no one to call us to account.'

 
His speech was received with great approval, and he at once bound them all

to union, using the barbarous ceremonies and strange oaths of his country.

They then sent to the Canninefates to join their enterprise. This tribe inhabits

part of the Island, and though inferior in numbers to the Batavi, they are of

the same race and language and the same courageous spirit. Civilis next sent

secret  messages  to  win  over  the  Batavian  troops,  which  after  serving  as

Roman  auxiliaries  in  Britain  had  been  sent,  as  we  have  already  seen,  to

Germany and were now stationed at Mainz.

 
One of the Canninefates, Brinno by name, was a man of distinguished family

and stubborn courage. His father had often ventured acts of hostility, and had

with  complete  impunity  shown  his  contempt  for  Caligula's  farcical

expedition.  To  belong  to  such  a  family  of  rebels  was  in  itself  a

recommendation. He was accordingly placed on a shield, swung up on the

shoulders of his friends, and thus elected leader after the fashion of the tribe.

Summoning to his aid the Frisii —a tribe from beyond the Rhine—he fell

upon two cohorts of auxiliaries whose camp lay close to the neighbouring

shore. The attack was unexpected, and the troops, even if they had foreseen

it, were not strong enough to offer resistance: so the camp was taken and

looted. They then fell on the Roman camp-followers and traders, who had

gone off in all directions as if peace were assured. Finding the forts now

threatened with destruction, the Roman officers set fire to them, as they had

no means of defence. All the troops with their standards and colours retired in

a body to the upper end of the island, led by Aquilius, a senior centurion. But

they were an army in name only, not in strength, for Vitellius had withdrawn

all the efficient soldiers and had replaced them by a useless mob, who had

been drawn from the neighbouring Nervian and German villages and were

only embarrassed by their armour.

 
Civilis thought it best to proceed by guile, and actually ventured to blame the

Roman officers for abandoning the forts. He could, he told them, with the

cohort under his command, suppress the outbreak of the Canninefates without

their assistance: they could all go back to their winter-quarters. However, it

was plain that some treachery underlay his advice—it would be easier to

crush the cohorts if they were separated—and also that Civilis, not Brinno,

was at the head of this war. Evidence of this gradually leaked out, as theGermans loved war too well to keep the secret for long. Finding his artifice

unsuccessful, Civilis tried force instead, forming the Canninefates, Frisii and

Batavi into three separate columns.

 
The  Roman  line  faced  them  in  position  near  the  Rhine  bank.  They  had

brought their ships there after the burning of the forts, and these were now

turned with their prows towards the enemy. Soon after the engagement began

a Tungrian cohort deserted to Civilis, and the Romans were so startled by this

unexpected treachery that they were cut to pieces by their allies and their

enemies  combined.  Similar  treachery  occurred  in  the  fleet.  Some  of  the

rowers, who were Batavians, feigning clumsiness tried to impede the sailors

and marines in the performance of their functions, and after a while openly

resisted them and turned the ships' sterns towards the enemy's bank. Finally,

they killed the pilots and centurions who refused to join them, and thus all the

twenty-four ships of the flotilla either deserted to the enemy or were captured

by them.

 
This victory made Civilis immediately famous and proved subsequently very

useful. Having now got the ships and the weapons which they needed, he and

his  followers  were  enthusiastically  proclaimed  as  champions  of  liberty

throughout  Germany  and  Gaul.  The  German  provinces  immediately  sent

envoys with offers of help, while Civilis endeavoured by diplomacy and by

bribery  to  secure  an  alliance  with  the  Gauls.  He  sent  back  the  auxiliary

officers whom he had taken prisoner, each to his own tribe, and offered the

cohorts the choice of either going home or remaining with him. Those who

remained were given an honourable position in his army: and those who went

home received presents out of the Roman spoil. At the same time Civilis

talked to them confidentially and reminded them of the miseries they had

endured  for  all  these  years,  in  which  they  had  disguised  their  wretched

slavery under the name of peace. 'The Batavi,' he would say, 'were excused

from taxation, and yet they have taken arms against the common tyrant. In

the  first  engagement  the  Romans  were  routed  and  beaten.  What  if  Gaul

throws off the yoke? What forces are there left in Italy? It is with the blood of

provincials that their provinces are won. Don't think of the defeat of Vindex.

Why, it was the Batavian cavalry which trampled on the Aedui and Arverni,

and there were Belgic auxiliaries in Verginius' force. The truth is that Gaul

succumbed  to  her  own  armies.  But  now  we  are  all  united  in  one  party,

fortified,  moreover,  by  the  military  discipline  which  prevails  in  Romancamps: and we have on our side the veterans before whom Otho's legions

lately bit the dust. Let Syria and Asia play the slave: the East is used to

tyrants: but there are many still living in Gaul who were born before the days

of tribute. Indeed, it is only the other day that Quintilius Varus was killed,

when slavery was driven out of Germany, and they brought into the field not

the  Emperor  Vitellius  but  Caesar  Augustus  himself.  Why,  liberty  is  the

natural prerogative even of dumb animals: courage is the peculiar attribute of

man. Heaven helps the brave. Come, then, fall upon them while your hands

are free and theirs are tied, while you are fresh and they are weary. Some of

them are for Vespasian, others for Vitellius; now is your chance to crush both

parties at once.'

 
Civilis thus had his eye on Gaul and Germany and aspired, had his project

prospered, to become king of two countries, one pre-eminent in wealth and

the other in military strength.

 
 

 
                      The Mutiny of the Batavian Cohorts

 
 

 
Hordeonius Flaccus at first furthered Civilis' schemes by shutting his eyes to

them. But when messengers kept arriving in panic with news that a camp had

been stormed, cohorts wiped out, and not a Roman left in the Batavian Island,

he instructed Munius Lupercus, who commanded the two legions in winter-

quarters, to march against the enemy. Lupercus lost no time in crossing the

river, taking the legions whom he had with him, some Ubii who were close at

hand, and the Treviran cavalry who were stationed not far away. To this force

he added a regiment of Batavian cavalry, who, though their loyalty had long

ago succumbed, still concealed the fact, because they hoped their desertion

would fetch a higher price, if they actually betrayed the Romans on the field.

Civilis set the standards of the defeated cohorts round him in a ring to keep

their fresh honours before the eyes of his men, and to terrify the enemy by

reminding them of their disaster. He also gave orders that his own mother and

sisters and all the wives and small children of his soldiers should be stationed

in the rear to spur them to victory or shame them if they were beaten. When

his line raised their battle-cry, the men singing and the women shrieking, the

legions and their auxiliaries replied with a comparatively feeble cheer, fortheir left wing had been exposed by the desertion of the Batavian cavalry,

who  promptly  turned  against  us.  However,  despite  the  confusion,  the

legionaries gripped their swords and kept their places. Then the Ubian and

Treviran auxiliaries broke in shameful flight and went wandering all over the

country. The Germans pressed hard on their heels and meanwhile the legions

could  make  good  their  escape  into  the  camp,  which  was  called  'Castra

Vetera'. Claudius Labeo, who commanded the Batavian cavalry, had opposed

Civilis as a rival in some petty municipal dispute. Civilis was afraid that, if he

killed  him,  he  might  offend  his  countrymen,  while  if  he  spared  him  his

presence would give rise to dissension; so he sent him off by sea to the Frisii.

 
It was at this time that the cohorts of Batavians and Canninefates, on their

way to Rome under orders from Vitellius, received the message which Civilis

had sent to them. They promptly fell into a ferment of unruly insolence and

demanded a special grant as payment for their journey, double pay, and an

increase in the number of their cavalry. Although all these things had been

promised by Vitellius they had no hope of obtaining them, but wanted an

excuse for rebellion. Flaccus made many concessions, but the only result was

that they redoubled their vigour and demanded what they felt sure he would

refuse. Paying no further heed to him they made for Lower Germany, to join

Civilis.  Flaccus  summoned  the  tribunes  and  centurions  and  debated  with

them whether he should use force to punish this defiance of authority. After a

while he gave way to his natural cowardice and the fears of his subordinates,

who were distressed by the thought that the loyalty of the auxiliaries was

doubtful and that the legions had been recruited by a hurried levy. It was

decided, therefore, to keep the soldiers in camp. However, he soon changed

his mind when he found himself criticized by the very men whose advice he

had taken. He now seemed bent on pursuit, and wrote to Herennius Gallus in

command of the First legion, who was holding Bonn, telling him to bar the

path of the Batavians, and promising that he and his army would follow hard

upon their heels. The rebels might certainly have been crushed had Flaccus

and  Gallus  each  advanced  their  forces  from  opposite  directions  and  thus

surrounded them. But Flaccus soon gave up the idea, and wrote another letter

to Gallus, warning him to let the rebels pass undisturbed. This gave rise to a

suspicion that the generals were purposely promoting the war; and all the

disasters  which  had  already  occurred  or  were  feared  in  the  future,  were

attributed not to the soldiers' inefficiency or the strength of the enemy, but tothe treachery of the generals.

 
On nearing the camp at Bonn, the Batavians sent forward a messenger to

explain their intentions to Herennius Gallus. Against the Romans, for whom

they had fought so often, they had no wish to make war: but they were worn

out after a long and unprofitable term of service and wanted to go home and

rest. If no one opposed them they would march peaceably by; but if hostility

was  offered  they  would  find  a  passage  at  the  point  of  the  sword.  Gallus

hesitated, but his men induced him to risk an engagement. Three thousand

legionaries, some hastily recruited Belgic auxiliaries, and a mob of peasants

and camp-followers, who were as cowardly in action as they were boastful

before it, came pouring out simultaneously from all the gates, hoping with

their superior numbers to surround the Batavians. But these were experienced

veterans. They formed up into columns in deep formation that defied assault

on front, flank, or rear. They thus pierced our thinner line. The Belgae giving

way, the legion was driven back and ran in terror to reach the trench and the

gates of the camp. It was there that we suffered the heaviest losses. The

trenches were filled with dead, who were not all killed by the blows of the

enemy, for many were stifled in the press or perished on each other's swords.

The victorious cohorts avoided Cologne and marched on without attempting

any  further  hostilities.  For  the  battle  at  Bonn  they  continued  to  excuse

themselves.  They  had  asked  for  peace,  they  said,  and  when  peace  was

persistently refused, had merely acted in self-defence.

 
 

 
                                The Siege of Vetera

 
 

 
After the arrival of these veteran cohorts Civilis was now at the head of a

respectable  army.  But  being  still  uncertain  of  his  plans,  and  engaged  in

reckoning  up  the  Roman  forces,  he  made  all  who  were  with  him  swear

allegiance to Vespasian, and sent envoys to the two legions, who after their

defeat in the former engagement had retired into Vetera, asking them to take

the same oath. The answer came back that they never followed the advice

either of a traitor or of an enemy: Vitellius was their emperor, and they would

keep their allegiance and their arms for him so long as they had breath in

their bodies. A Batavian deserter need not try to decide the destiny of Rome;he should rather expect the punishment he richly deserved. When this was

reported to Civilis he flew into a passion, and called the whole Batavian

people to take arms. They were joined by the Bructeri and Tencteri, and

Germany was summoned to come and share the plunder and the glory.

 
Threatened with this gathering storm, Munius Lupercus and Numisius Rufus,

who  were  in  command  of  the  two  legions,  proceeded  to  strengthen  the

ramparts and walls. They pulled down the buildings near the military camp,

which had grown into a small town during the long years of peace, fearing

that  the  enemy  might  make  use  of  them.  But  they  omitted  to  provide  a

sufficient store of provisions for the camp, and authorized the soldiers to

make  up  the  deficiency  by  looting,  with  the  result  that  what  might  have

supplied their needs for a long time was consumed in a few days. Meanwhile

Civilis advanced, himself holding the centre with the flower of the Batavi: on

both banks of the Rhine he massed large bands of Germans to strike terror

into the enemy: the cavalry galloped through the fields, while the ships were

simultaneously  moved  up  the  stream.  Here  could  be  seen  the  colours  of

veteran Roman cohorts, there the figures of beasts which the Germans had

brought from their woods and groves, as their tribes do when they go to

battle.  It  seemed  both  a  civil  and  a  savage  war  at  once;  and  this  strange

confusion astounded the besieged. The hopes of the assailants rose when they

saw the circumference of the ramparts, for there were barely five thousand

Roman  soldiers  to  defend  a  camp  which  had  been  laid  out  to  hold  two

legions. However, a large number of camp-followers had collected there on

the break-up of peace, and remained to give what assistance they could to the

military operations.

 
The camp was built partly on the gentle slope of a hill and partly on the level

ground. Augustus had believed that it would serve as a base of operations and

a check upon the German tribes: as for their actually coming to assault our

legions, such a disaster never occurred to him. Consequently no trouble had

been taken in choosing the site or erecting defences: the strength of the troops

had always seemed sufficient.

 
The Batavians and the Germans from across the Rhine now formed up tribe

by tribe—the separation was designed to show their individual prowess—and

opened  fire  from  a  distance.  Finding  that  most  of  their  missiles  fell

harmlessly on to the turrets and pinnacles of the walls, and that they werebeing wounded by stones hurled from above, they charged with a wild shout

and surged up to the rampart, some using scaling-ladders, others climbing

over their comrades who had formed a 'tortoise'. But no sooner had some of

them begun to scale the wall, than they were hurled down by the besieged,

who thrust at them with sword and shield, and buried under a shower of

stakes and javelins. The Germans are always impetuous at the beginning of

an action and over-confident when they are winning; and on this occasion

their greed for plunder even steeled them to face difficulties. They actually

attempted to use siege-engines, with which they were quite unfamiliar. But

though  they  had  no  skill  themselves,  some  of  the  deserters  and  prisoners

showed them how to build a sort of bridge or platform of timber, on to which

they fitted wheels and rolled it forward. Thus some of them stood on this

platform and fought as though from a mound, while others, concealed inside,

tried to undermine the walls. However, stones hurled from catapults soon

destroyed  this  rude  engine.  Then  they  began  to  get  ready  hurdles  and

mantlets, but the besieged shot blazing spears on to them from engines, and

even attacked the assailants themselves with fire-darts. At last they gave up

all hope of an assault and resolved to try a waiting policy, being well aware

that the camp contained only a few days' provisions and a large number of

non-combatants. They hoped that famine would breed treason, and counted,

besides, on the wavering loyalty of the slaves and the usual hazards of war to

aid them.

 
Meanwhile,  Flaccus,  who  had  received  news  of  the  siege  of  Vetera,

dispatched a party to recruit auxiliaries in Gaul, and gave Dillius Vocula, in

command  of  the  Twenty-second,  a  force  of  picked  soldiers  from  his  two

legions. Vocula was to hurry by forced marches along the bank of the Rhine,

while Flaccus himself was to approach by water, since he was in bad health

and unpopular with his men. Indeed, they grumbled openly that he had let the

Batavian cohorts get away from Mainz, had connived at Civilis' schemes, and

invited the Germans to join the alliance. Vespasian, they said, owed his rise

more to Flaccus than to all the assistance of Antonius Primus or of Mucianus,

for overt hatred and hostility can be openly crushed, but treachery and deceit

cannot be detected, much less parried. While Civilis took the field himself

and  arranged  his  own  fighting  line,  Hordeonius  lay  on  a  couch  in  his

bedroom and gave whatever orders best suited the enemy's convenience. Why

should all these companies of brave soldiers be commanded by one miserableold invalid? Let them rather kill the traitor and free their brave hearts and

good hopes from the incubus of such an evil omen. Having worked on each

other's feelings by these complaints, they were still further incensed by the

arrival of a letter from Vespasian. As this could not be concealed, Flaccus

read it before a meeting of the soldiers, and the messengers who brought it

were sent to Vitellius in chains.

 
With feelings thus appeased the army marched on to Bonn, the head-quarters

of the First legion. There the men were still more indignant with Flaccus, on

whom they laid the blame of their recent defeat. It was by his orders, they

argued,  that  they  had  taken  the  field  against  the  Batavians  on  the

understanding  that  the  legions  from  Mainz  were  in  pursuit.  But  no

reinforcements had arrived and his treachery was responsible for their losses.

The facts, moreover, were unknown to the other armies, nor was any report

sent to their emperor, although this treacherous outbreak could have been

nipped in the bud by the combined aid of all the provinces. In answer Flaccus

read out to the army copies of all the letters which he had sent from time to

time all over Gaul and Britain and Spain to ask for assistance, and introduced

the disastrous practice of having all letters delivered to the standard-bearers

of the legions, who read them to the soldiers before the general had seen

them.

 
He then gave orders that one of the mutineers should be put in irons, more by

way  of  vindicating  his  authority  than  because  one  man  was  especially  to

blame.  Leaving  Bonn,  the  army  moved  on  to  Cologne,  where  they  were

joined by large numbers of Gallic auxiliaries, who at first zealously supported

the Roman cause: later, when the Germans prospered, most of the tribes took

arms against us, actuated by hopes of liberty and an ambition to establish an

empire of their own when once they had shaken off the yoke.

 
Meanwhile the army's indignation steadily increased. The imprisonment of a

single  soldier  was  not  enough  to  terrify  them,  and,  indeed,  the  prisoner

actually accused the general of complicity in crime, alleging that he himself

had carried messages between Flaccus and Civilis. 'It is because I can testify

to the truth,' he said, 'that Flaccus wants to get rid of me on a false charge.'

Thereupon Vocula, with admirable self-possession, mounted the tribunal and,

in spite of the man's protestations, ordered him to be seized and led away to

prison.  This  alarmed  the  disaffected,  while  the  better  sort  obeyed  himpromptly. The army then unanimously demanded that Vocula should lead

them, and Flaccus accordingly resigned the chief command to him.

 
However, there was much to exasperate their disaffection. They were short

both of pay and of provisions: the Gauls refused either to enlist or to pay

tribute: drought, usually unknown in that climate, made the Rhine almost too

low for navigation, and thus hampered their commissariat: patrols had to be

posted at intervals all along the bank to prevent the Germans fording the

river: and in consequence of all this they had less food and more mouths to

eat it. To the ignorant the lowness of the river seemed in itself an evil omen,

as though the ancient bulwarks of the empire were now failing them. In peace

they would have called it bad luck or the course of nature: now it was 'fate'

and 'the anger of heaven'.

 
On entering Novaesium they were joined by the Sixteenth legion. Herennius

Gallus now shared with Vocula the responsibility of command. As they could

not  venture  out  against  the  enemy,  they  encamped  ...  at  a  place  called

Gelduba, where the soldiers were trained in deploying, in fortification and

entrenchment,  and  in  various  other  military  manœuvres.  To  inspire  their

courage with the further incentive of plunder, Vocula led out part of the force

against  the  neighbouring  tribe  of  the  Cugerni,  who  had  accepted  Civilis'

offers of alliance. The rest of the troops were left behind with Herennius

Gallus, and it happened that a corn-ship with a full cargo, which had run

aground close to the camp, was towed over by the Germans to their own

bank. This was more than Gallus could tolerate, so he sent a cohort to the

rescue.  The  number  of  the  Germans  soon  increased:  both  sides  gradually

gathered reinforcements and a regular battle was fought, with the result that

the Germans towed off the ship, inflicting heavy losses. The defeated troops

followed what had now become their regular custom, and threw the blame

not on their own inefficiency but on their commanding-officer's bad faith.

They  dragged  him  from  his  quarters,  tore  his  uniform  and  flogged  him,

bidding him tell them how much he had got for betraying the army, and who

were  his  accomplices.  Then  their  indignation  recoiled  on  Hordeonius

Flaccus:  he  was  the  real  criminal:  Gallus  was  only  his  tool.  At  last  their

threats so terrified Gallus that he, too, charged Flaccus with treason. He was

put in irons until the arrival of Vocula, who at once set him free, and on the

next day had the ringleaders of the riot executed. The army showed, indeed, a

strange contrast in its equal readiness to mutiny and to submit to punishment.The common soldiers' loyalty to Vitellius was beyond question, while the

higher  ranks  inclined  towards  Vespasian.  Thus  we  find  a  succession  of

outbreaks and penalties; an alternation of insubordination with obedience to

discipline; for the troops could be punished though not controlled.

 
Meanwhile the whole of Germany was ready to worship Civilis, sending him

vast reinforcements and ratifying the alliance with hostages from their noblest

families. He gave orders that the country of the Ubii and Treviri was to be

laid waste by their nearest neighbours, and sent another party across the Maas

to harass the Menapii and Morini and other frontier tribes of Gaul. In both

quarters they plundered freely, and were especially savage towards the Ubii,

because  they  were  a  tribe  of  German  origin  who  had  renounced  their

fatherland and adopted the name of Agrippinenses. A Ubian cohort was cut to

pieces at the village of Marcodurum, where they were off their guard, trusting

to  their  distance  from  the  Rhine.  The  Ubii  did  not  take  this  quietly,  nor

hesitate  to  seek  reprisals  from  the  Germans,  which  they  did  at  first  with

impunity. In the end, however, the Germans proved too much for them, and

throughout the war the Ubii were always more conspicuous for good faith

than  good  fortune.  Their  collapse  strengthened  Civilis'  position,  and

emboldened by success, he now vigorously pressed on the blockade of the

legions  at  Vetera,  and  redoubled  his  vigilance  to  prevent  any  message

creeping through from the relieving army. The Batavians were told off to

look  after  the  engines  and  siege-works:  the  Germans,  who  clamoured  for

battle, were sent to demolish the rampart and renew the fight directly they

were beaten off. There were so many of them that their losses mattered little.

 
Nightfall did not see the end of their task. They built huge fires of wood all

round the ramparts and sat drinking by them; then, as the wine warmed their

hearts,  one  by  one  they  dashed  into  the  fight  with  blind  courage.  In  the

darkness their missiles were ineffective, but the barbarian troops were clearly

visible to the Romans, and any one whose daring or bright ornaments made

him conspicuous at once became a mark for their aim. At last Civilis saw

their mistake, and gave orders to extinguish the fires and plunge the whole

scene into a confusion of darkness and the din of arms. Discordant shouts

now arose: everything was vague and uncertain: no one could see to strike or

to parry. Wherever a shout was heard, they would wheel round and lunge in

that direction. Valour was useless: chance and chaos ruled supreme: and the

bravest soldier often fell under a coward's bolt. The Germans fought withblind fury. The Roman troops were more familiar with danger; they hurled

down iron-clamped stakes and heavy stones with sure effect. Wherever the

sound of some one climbing or the clang of a scaling-ladder betrayed the

presence of the enemy, they thrust them back with their shields and followed

them with a shower of javelins. Many appeared on top of the walls, and these

they stabbed with their short swords. And so the night wore on.

 
Day dawned upon new methods of attack. The Batavians had built a wooden

tower of two stories and moved it up to the Head-quarters Gate, which was

the most accessible spot. However, our soldiers, by using strong poles and

hurling wooden beams, soon battered it to pieces, with great loss of life to

those who were standing on it. While they were still dismayed at this, we

made  a  sudden  and  successful  sally.  Meanwhile  the  legionaries,  with

remarkable skill and ingenuity, invented still further contrivances. The one

which caused most terror was a crane with a movable arm suspended over

their assailants' heads: this arm was suddenly lowered, snatched up one or

more of the enemy into the air before his fellows' eyes, and, as the heavy end

was swung round, tossed him into the middle of the camp. Civilis now gave

up hope of storming the camp and renewed a leisurely blockade, trying all the

time  by  messages  and  offers  of  reward  to  undermine  the  loyalty  of  the

legions.

 
 

 
                                The Relief of Vetera

 
 

 
Such was the course of events in Germany up to the date of the battle of

Cremona. News of this arrived by letter from Antonius Primus, who enclosed

a copy of Caecina's edict, and Alpinius Montanus, who commanded one of

the defeated auxiliary cohorts, came in person to confess that his party had

been beaten. The troops were variously affected by the news. The Gallic

auxiliaries, who had no feelings of affection or dislike to either party and

served  without  sentiment,  promptly  took  the  advice  of  their  officers  and

deserted Vitellius. The veterans hesitated; under pressure from Flaccus and

their officers they eventually took the oath of allegiance, but it was clear from

their faces that their hearts were not in it, and while repeating the rest of the

formula they boggled at the name of Vespasian, either muttering it undertheir breath or more often omitting it altogether.

 
Their suspicions were further inflamed when Antonius' letter to Civilis was

read out before the meeting; it seemed to address Civilis as a member of the

Flavian party, and to argue hostility to the German army. The news was next

brought to the camp at Gelduba, where it gave rise to the same comments and

the same scenes. Montanus was sent to carry instructions to Civilis that he

was to cease from hostilities and not to make war on Rome under a false

pretext;  if  it  was  to  help  Vespasian  that  he  had  taken  arms,  he  had  now

achieved his object. Civilis at first replied in guarded terms. Then, as he saw

that Montanus was an impetuous person who would welcome a revolution, he

began to complain of all the dangers he had endured in the service of Rome

for the last twenty-five years. 'A fine reward I have received,' he cried, 'for all

my  labours—my  brother's  execution,  my  own  imprisonment,  and  the

bloodthirsty clamours of this army, from which I claim satisfaction by natural

right since they have sought my destruction. As for you Trevirans and all the

rest  that  have  the  souls  of  slaves,  what  reward  do  you  hope  to  gain  for

shedding your blood so often in the cause of Rome, except the thankless task

of military service, endless taxation, and the rods and axes of these capricious

tyrants? Look at me! I have only a single cohort under my command, and yet

with the Canninefates and Batavi, a mere fraction of the Gallic peoples, I am

engaged  in  destroying  their  great  useless  camp  and  besieging  them  with

famine and the sword. In short, our venture will either end in freedom or, if

we are beaten, we shall be no worse off than before.' Having thus inflamed

Montanus he told him to take back a milder answer and dismissed him. On

his return Montanus pretended that his errand had been fruitless, and said

nothing about the rest of the interview: but it soon came to light.

 
Retaining a portion of his force, Civilis sent the veteran cohorts with the most

efficient of the German troops against Vocula and his army. He gave the

command to Julius Maximus and his nephew Claudius Victor. After rushing

the winter-quarters of a cavalry regiment at Asciburgium on their way, they

fell upon the Roman camp and so completely surprised it that Vocula had no

time to address his army or to form it for battle. The only precaution he could

take in the general panic was to mass the legionaries in the centre with the

auxiliaries  scattered  on  either  flank.  Our  cavalry  charged,  but  found  the

enemy in good order ready to receive them, and came flying back on to their

own  infantry.  What  followed  was  more  of  a  massacre  than  a  battle.  TheNervian cohorts, either from panic or treachery, left our flanks exposed; thus

the legions had to bear the brunt. They had already lost their standards and

were being cut down in the trenches, when a fresh reinforcement suddenly

changed the fortune of the fight. Some Basque auxiliaries, originally levied

by Galba, who had now been summoned to the rescue, on nearing the camp

heard  the  sound  of  fighting,  and  while  the  enemy  were  occupied,  came

charging in on their rear. This caused more consternation than their numbers

warranted, the enemy taking them for the whole Roman force, either from

Novaesium or from Mainz. This mistake encouraged the Roman troops: their

confidence  in  others  brought  confidence  in  themselves.  The  best  of  the

Batavians,  at  least  of  their  infantry,  fell.  The  cavalry  made  off  with  the

standards and prisoners taken in the earlier stage of the battle. Though our

losses that day were numerically larger, they were unimportant, whereas the

Germans lost their best troops.

 
On both sides the generals deserved defeat, and failed to make good use of

their success. Their fault was the same. Had Civilis furnished the attacking

column with more troops, they could never have been surrounded by such a

small force, and having stormed the camp would have destroyed it. Vocula,

on  the  other  hand,  had  not  even  set  scouts  to  warn  him  of  the  enemy's

approach, and consequently no sooner sallied out than he was beaten. Then,

when he had won the victory, he showed great lack of confidence, and wasted

day after day before moving against the enemy. If he had made haste to

follow up his success and struck at the enemy at once, he might have raised

the siege of Vetera at one blow.

 
Meanwhile Civilis had been playing upon the feelings of the besieged by

pretending that the Romans had been defeated and success had favoured his

arms. The captured standards and colours were carried round the walls and

the prisoners also displayed. One of these did a famous deed of heroism.

Shouting at the top of his voice, he revealed the truth. The Germans at once

struck him dead, which only served to confirm his information. Soon, too, the

besieged saw signs of harried fields and the smoke of burning farms, and

began to realize that a victorious army was approaching. When he was in

sight of the camp Vocula ordered his men to plant the standards and construct

a trench and rampart round them: they were to deposit all their baggage there

and fight unencumbered. This made them shout at the general to give them

the signal; and they had learnt to use threats too. Without even taking time toform their line they started the battle, all tired as they were, and in disorder.

Civilis was ready waiting for them, trusting quite as much to their mistakes as

to the merits of his own men. The Romans fought with varying fortune. All

the most mutinous proved cowards: some, however, remembered their recent

victory and stuck to their places, cutting down the enemy, and encouraging

themselves and their neighbours. When the battle was thus renewed, they

waved their hands and signalled to the besieged not to lose their opportunity.

These  were  watching  all  that  happened  from  the  walls,  and  now  came

bursting out at every gate. It chanced that at this point Civilis' horse fell and

threw him; both armies believed the rumour that he had been wounded and

killed.  This  caused  immense  consternation  to  his  army  and  immense

encouragement to ours. However, Vocula failed to pursue them when they

fled, and merely set about strengthening the rampart and turrets, apparently in

fear of another blockade. His frequent failure to make use of his victory gives

colour to the suspicion that he preferred war.

 
What chiefly distressed our troops was the lack of supplies. The baggage-

train of the legions was sent to Novaesium with a crowd of non-combatants

to fetch provisions thence by land, the enemy being now masters of the river.

The first convoy got through safely, while Civilis was recovering from his

fall.  But  when  he  heard  that  a  second  foraging-party  had  been  sent  to

Novaesium under guard of several cohorts, and that they were proceeding on

their way with their arms piled in the wagons as if it was a time of perfect

peace, few keeping to the standards and all wandering at will, he sent some

men forward to hold the bridges and any places where the road was narrow,

and then formed up and attacked. The battle was fought on a long straggling

line, and the issue was still doubtful when nightfall broke it off. The cohorts

made their way through to Gelduba, where the camp remained as it was,

garrisoned by the soldiers who had been left behind there. It was obvious

what  dangers  the  convoy  would  have  to  face  on  the  return  journey;  they

would be heavily laden and had already lost their nerve.

 
Vocula accordingly added to his force a thousand picked men from the Fifth

and Fifteenth legions who had been at Vetera during the siege, all tough

soldiers with a grievance against their generals. Against his orders, more than

the thousand started with him, openly complaining on the march that they

would not put up with famine and the treachery of their generals any longer.

On the other hand, those who stayed behind grumbled that they were left totheir fate now that part of the garrison had been removed. Thus there was a

double mutiny, one party calling Vocula back, the others refusing to return to

camp.

 
Meanwhile Civilis laid siege to Vetera. Vocula retired to Gelduba, and thence

to  Novaesium,  shortly  afterwards  winning  a  cavalry  skirmish  just  outside

Novaesium. The Roman soldiers, however, alike in success and in failure,

were  as  eager  as  ever  to  make  an  end  of  their  generals.  Now  that  their

numbers were swelled by the arrival of the detachments from the Fifth and

the Fifteenth they demanded their donative, having learnt that money had

arrived  from  Vitellius.  Without  further  delay  Flaccus  gave  it  to  them  in

Vespasian's name, and this did more than anything else to promote mutiny.

They indulged in wild dissipation and met every night in drinking-parties, at

which they revived their old grudge against Hordeonius Flaccus. None of the

officers ventured to interfere with them—the darkness somehow obscured

their  sense  of  duty—and  at  last  they  dragged  Flaccus  out  of  bed  and

murdered  him.  They  were  preparing  to  do  the  same  with  Vocula,  but  he

narrowly escaped in the darkness, disguised as a slave.

 
When  the  excitement  subsided,  their  fears  returned,  and  they  sent  letters

round by centurions to all the Gallic communities, asking for reinforcements

and  money  for  the  soldiers'  pay.  Without  a  leader  a  mob  is  always  rash,

timorous, and inactive. On the approach of Civilis they hurriedly snatched up

their arms, and then immediately dropped them and took to flight. Misfortune

now bred disunion, and the army of the Upper Rhine dissociated itself from

the rest. However, they set up the statues of Vitellius again in the camp and in

the neighbouring Belgic villages, although by now Vitellius was dead. Soon

the soldiers of the First, Fourth, and Twenty-second repented of their folly

and  rejoined  Vocula.  He  made  them  take  a  second  oath  of  allegiance  to

Vespasian and led them off to raise the siege of Mainz. The besieging army, a

combined force of Chatti, Usipi, and Mattiaci, had already retired, having got

sufficient loot and suffered some loss. Our troops surprised them while they

were  scattered  along  the  road,  and  immediately  attacked.  Moreover,  the

Treviri had built a rampart and breastwork all along their frontier and fought

the Germans again and again with heavy loss to both sides. Before long,

however, they rebelled, and thus sullied their great services to the Roman

people.

  

 
                    Rome and the Empire under Vespasian

 
 

 
During these events Vespasian took up his second consulship and Titus his

first, both in absence. Rome was depressed and beset by manifold anxieties.

Apart from the real miseries of the moment, it was plunged into a groundless

panic on the rumour of a rebellion in Africa, where Lucius Piso was supposed

to be plotting a revolution. Piso, who was governor of the province, was far

from being a firebrand. But the severity of the winter delayed the corn-ships,

and the common people, accustomed to buy their bread day by day, whose

interest in politics was confined to the corn-supply, soon began to believe

their  fears  that  the  coast  of  Africa  was  being  blockaded  and  supplies

withheld.  The  Vitellians,  who  were  still  under  the  sway  of  party  spirit,

fostered  this  rumour,  and  even  the  victorious  party  were  not  entirely

displeased at it, for none of their victories in the civil war had satisfied their

greed, and even foreign wars fell far short of their ambition.

 
On the first of January the senate was convened by the Urban Praetor, Julius

Frontinus,  and  passed  votes  of  thanks  and  congratulation  to  the  generals,

armies, and foreign princes. Tettius Julianus, who had left his legion when it

went  over  to  Vespasian,  was  deprived  of  his  praetorship,  which  was

conferred  upon  Plotius  Grypus.  Hormus  was  raised  to  equestrian  rank.

Frontinus then resigned his praetorship and Caesar Domitian succeeded him.

His name now stood at the head of all dispatches and edicts, but the real

authority lay with Mucianus, although Domitian, following the promptings of

his friends and of his own desires, frequently asserted his independence. But

Mucianus' chief cause of anxiety lay in Antonius Primus and Arrius Varus.

The fame of their exploits was still fresh; the soldiers worshipped them; and

they were popular in Rome, because they had used no violence off the field

of battle. It was even hinted that Antonius had urged Crassus Scribonianus to

seize the throne. He was a man who owed his distinction to famous ancestors

and  to  his  brother's  memory,  and  Antonius  could  promise  him  adequate

support for a conspiracy. However, Scribonianus refused. He had a terror of

all  risks,  and  would  hardly  have  been  seduced  even  by  the  certainty  of

success.  Being  unable  to  crush  Antonius  openly,  Mucianus  showeredcompliments  on  him  in  the  senate  and  embarrassed  him  with  promises,

hinting at the governorship of Nearer Spain, which the departure of Cluvius

Rufus  had  left  vacant.  Meanwhile  he  lavished  military  commands  on

Antonius' friends. Then, having filled his empty head with ambitious hopes,

he destroyed his influence at one stroke by moving the Seventh legion, which

was passionately attached to Antonius, into winter-quarters. The Third, who

were similarly devoted to Arrius Varus, were sent back to Syria, and part of

the army was taken out to the war in Germany. Thus, on the removal of the

disturbing factors, the city could resume its normal life under the old regime

of law and civil government.

 
On  the  day  of  his  first  appearance  in  the  senate  Domitian  spoke  a  few

moderate  sentences  regretting  the  absence  of  his  father  and  brother.  His

behaviour  was  most  proper,  and,  as  his  character  was  still  an  unknown

quantity, his blushes were taken for signs of modesty. He moved from the

chair that all Galba's honours should be restored, to which Curtius Montanus

proposed an amendment that some respect should also be paid to the memory

of Piso. The senate approved both proposals, though nothing was done about

Piso. Next, various commissions were appointed by lot to restore the spoils of

war to the owners; to examine and affix the bronze tablets of laws, which in

course of time had dropped off the walls; to revise the list of public holidays,

which in these days of flattery had been disgracefully tampered with; and to

introduce  some  economy  into  public  expenditure.  Tettius  Julianus  was

restored to his praetorship as soon as it was discovered that he had taken

refuge with Vespasian: but Grypus was allowed to retain his rank. It was then

decided to resume the hearing of the case of Musonius Rufus against Publius

Celer. Publius was convicted and the shade of Soranus satisfied. This strict

verdict made the day memorable in the annals of Rome, and credit was also

due to private enterprise, for everybody felt that Musonius had done his duty

in bringing the action. On the other hand, Demetrius, a professor of Cynic

philosophy,  earned  discredit  for  defending  an  obvious  criminal  more  for

ostentatious motives than from honest conviction. As for Publius, courage

and fluency alike failed him at the critical moment. This trial was the signal

for  further  reprisals  against  prosecutors.  Junius  Mauricus  accordingly

petitioned Domitian that the senate might be allowed access to the minutes of

the imperial cabinet, in order to find out who had applied for leave to bring a

prosecution and against whom. The answer was that on such a question asthis the emperor must be consulted.

 
Accordingly, at the instigation of its leading members, the senate framed an

oath in these words, 'I call heaven to witness that I have never countenanced

any action prejudicial to any man's civil status, nor have I derived any profit

or any office from the misfortune of any Roman citizen.' The magistrates vied

with each other in their haste to take this oath, and the other members did the

same, when called upon to speak. Those who had a guilty conscience were

alarmed, and managed to alter the wording of the oath by various devices.

The house meanwhile applauded every sign of scruple, and protested against

each case of perjury. This kind of informal censure fell most severely on

Sariolenus  Vocula,  Nonius  Attianus,  and  Cestius  Severus,  who  were

notorious as habitual informers under Nero. Against Sariolenus there was

also  a  fresh  charge  of  having  continued  his  practices  with  Vitellius.  The

members went on shaking their fists at him until he left the house. They next

turned on Paccius Africanus, trying to hound him out in the same way. He

was  supposed  to  have  suggested  to  Nero  the  murder  of  the  two  brothers

Scribonius, who were famous for their friendship and their wealth. Africanus

dared not admit his guilt, though he could not very well deny it. So he swung

round on Vibius Crispus, who was pestering him with questions, and tried to

turn the tables by implicating him in the charges which he could not rebut,

thus shifting the odium on to his accomplice.

 
On  this  occasion  Vipstanus  Messala  gained  a  great  reputation,  both  for

dutiful affection and for eloquence, by venturing to intercede for his brother

Aquilius Regulus, although he had not attained the senatorial age. Regulus

had fallen into great disfavour for having brought about the ruin of the noble

families of the Crassi and of Orfitus. It was supposed that, though quite a

young man, he had voluntarily undertaken the prosecution, not to escape any

danger  which  was  threatening  him,  but  from  purely  ambitious  motives.

Crassus' wife, Sulpicia Praetextata, and his four sons were anxious to secure

revenge if the senate would grant a trial. Messala therefore made no attempt

to defend the case or the accused, but tried to shelter his brother, and had

already won over some of the senators. Curtius Montanus now attacked him

in a savage speech, and even went so far as to charge Regulus with having

given money to Piso's murderer after Galba's death, and with having bitten

Piso's head. 'That,' said he, 'Nero certainly did not compel you to do. You

purchased neither position nor safety by that savage piece of cruelty. We mayput up with the pleas of those wretches who prefer to ruin others rather than

endanger their own lives. But your father's banishment had guaranteed your

security. His property had been divided amongst his creditors. You were not

of an age to stand for office. Nero had nothing either to hope or to fear from

you. Your talents were as yet untried and you had never exerted them in any

man's defence, yet your lust for blood, your insatiable ambition, led you to

stain your young hands in the blood of Rome's nobility. At one swoop you

caused the ruin of innocent youths, of old and distinguished statesmen, of

high-born ladies; and out of the country's disaster you secured for yourself

the spoils of two ex-consuls, stuffed seven million sesterces into your purse,

and shone with the reflected glory of a priesthood. You would blame Nero's

lack of enterprise because he took one household at a time, thus causing

unnecessary fatigue to himself and his informers, when he might have ruined

the whole senate at a single word. Why, gentlemen, you must indeed keep

and  preserve  to  yourselves  a  counsellor  of  such  ready  resource.  Let  each

generation  have  its  good  examples:  and  as  our  old  men  follow  Eprius

Marcellus  or  Vibius  Crispus,  let  the  rising  generation  emulate  Regulus.

Villainy finds followers even when it fails. What if it flourish and prosper? If

we hesitate to touch a mere ex-quaestor, shall we be any bolder when he has

been praetor and consul? Or do you suppose that the race of tyrants came to

an end in Nero? That is what the people believed who outlived Tiberius or

Caligula, and meanwhile there arose one more infamous and more bloody

still.  We  are  not  afraid  of  Vespasian.  We  trust  his  years  and  his  natural

moderation. But a good precedent outlives a good sovereign. Gentlemen, we

are growing effete: we are no longer that senate which, after Nero had been

killed,  clamoured  for  the  punishment  of  all  informers  and  their  menials

according to our ancestors' rigorous prescription. The best chance comes on

the day after the death of a bad emperor.'

 
The senate listened to Montanus's speech with such sympathy that Helvidius

began  to  hope  that  it  might  be  possible  to  get  a  verdict  even  against

Marcellus. Beginning with a eulogy of Cluvius Rufus, who, though quite as

rich and as eloquent as Marcellus, had never brought any one into trouble

under Nero, he went on to attack Marcellus, both by contrasting him with

Rufus and by pressing home the charge against him. Feeling that the house

was  warming  to  this  rhetoric,  Marcellus  got  up  as  though  to  leave,

exclaiming, 'I am off, Helvidius: I leave you your senate: you can tyrannizeover it under Caesar's nose.' Vibius Crispus followed Marcellus, and, though

both were angry, their expressions were very different. Marcellus marched

out with flashing eyes, Crispus with a smile on his face. Eventually their

friends went and brought them back. Thus the struggle grew more and more

heated between a well-meaning majority and a small but powerful minority;

and since they were both animated by irreconcilable hatred, the day was spent

in vain recriminations. At the next sitting Domitian opened by recommending

them to forget their grievances and grudges and the unavoidable exigences of

the recent past. Mucianus then at great length moved a motion in favour of

the prosecutors, issuing a mild warning, almost in terms of entreaty, to those

who wanted to revive actions which had been begun and dropped.

 
Seeing that their attempt at independence was being thwarted, the senate gave

it up. However, that it might not seem as if the senate's opinion had been

flouted and complete impunity granted for all crimes committed under Nero,

Mucianus forced Octavius Sagitta and Antistius Sosianus, who had returned

from  exile,  to  go  back  to  the  islands  to  which  they  had  been  confined.

Octavius had committed adultery with Pontia Postumina, and, on her refusal

to marry him, had murdered her in a fit of jealous fury. Sosianus was an

unprincipled scoundrel who had been the ruin of many. The senate had found

them both guilty, and passed a heavy sentence of exile, nor had their penalty

been remitted, although others were allowed to return. However, this failed to

allay the ill-feeling against Mucianus, for Sosianus and Sagitta, whether they

returned or not, were of no importance, whereas people were afraid of the

professional prosecutors, who were men of wealth and ability and experts in

crime.

 
Unanimity  was  gradually  restored  in  the  senate  by  the  holding  of  a  trial

according to ancient precedent, before a court of the whole house. A senator

named Manlius Patruitus complained that he had been beaten before a mob of

people in the colony of Siena by order of the local magistrates. Nor had the

affront stopped there. They had held a mock funeral before his eyes, and had

accompanied their dirges and lamentations with gross insults levelled at the

whole senate. The accused were summoned; their case was tried; they were

convicted  and  punished.  A  further  decree  of  the  senate  was  passed

admonishing the commons of Siena to pay more respect to the laws. About

the same time Antonius Flamma was prosecuted by Cyrene for extortion, and

exiled for the inhumanity of his conduct. 
Meanwhile, a mutiny almost broke out among the soldiers. The men who had

been discharged by Vitellius came together again in support of Vespasian,

and demanded re-admission. They were joined by the selected legionaries

who  had  also  been  led  to  hope  for  service  in  the  Guards,  and  they  now

demanded the pay they had been promised. Even the Vitellians alone could

not  have  been  dispersed  without  serious  bloodshed,  but  it  would  require

immense sums of money to retain the services of such a large number of men.

Mucianus accordingly entered the barracks to make a careful estimate of each

man's term of service. He formed up the victorious troops with their own

arms and distinctive decorations, each company a few paces from the next.

Then the Vitellians who had surrendered, as we have described, at Bovillae,

and  all  the  other  soldiers  who  had  been  hunted  down  in  the  city  and  its

neighbourhood, were marched out almost entirely without arms or uniforms.

Mucianus then had them sorted out, and drew up in separate corps the troops

of the German army, of the British army, and of any others that were in

Rome. Their first glance at the scene astounded them. Facing them they saw

what looked like a fighting front bristling with weapons, while they were

caught in a trap, defenceless and foul with dirt. As soon as they began to be

sorted out a panic seized them. The German troops in particular were terrified

at  their  isolation,  and  felt  they  were  being  told  off  for  slaughter.  They

embraced their comrades and clung upon their necks, asking for one last kiss,

begging not to be left alone, crying out, 'Our cause is the same as yours, why

should our fate be different?' They appealed now to Mucianus, now to the

absent emperor, and lastly to the powers of Heaven, until Mucianus came to

the rescue of their imaginary terrors by calling them all 'sworn servants of

one  emperor',  for  he  found  that  the  victorious  army  was  joining  in  and

seconding their tears with cheering. On that day the matter ended there. A

few  days  later,  when  Domitian  addressed  them,  they  received  him  with

renewed confidence, refused his offer of lands, and begged for enlistment and

their pay instead. This was only a petition, but one that could not be refused:

so they were admitted to the Guards. Subsequently, those who had grown old

and  completed  the  regular  term  of  service  were  honourably  discharged.

Others were dismissed for misbehaviour, but one by one at different times,

which is always the safest method of weakening any kind of conspiracy.

 
To return to the senate; a bill was now passed that a loan of sixty million

sesterces  should  be  raised  from  private  individuals  and  administered  byPompeius Silvanus. This may have been a financial necessity, or they may

have wanted it to seem so. At any rate the necessity soon ceased to exist, or

else they gave up the pretence. Domitian then carried a proposal that the

consulships  conferred  by  Vitellius  should  be  cancelled,  and  that  a  state

funeral  should  be  held  in  honour  of  Flavius  Sabinus.  Both  proposals  are

striking evidence of the fickleness of human fortune, which so often makes

the first last and the last first.

 
It was about this time that Lucius Piso, the pro-consul of Africa, was killed.

To give a true explanation of this murder we must go back and take a brief

survey of certain matters which are closely connected with the reasons for

such  crimes.  Under  the  sainted  Augustus  and  Tiberius  the  pro-consul  of

Africa had in his command one legion and some auxiliaries with which to

guard the frontier of the empire. Caligula, who was restless by nature and

harboured suspicions of the then pro-consul, Marcus Silanus, withdrew the

legion from his command and put it under a legate whom he sent out for the

purpose.  As  each  had  an  equal  amount  of  patronage  and  their  functions

overlapped,  Caligula  thus  caused  a  state  of  friction  which  was  further

aggravated  by  regrettable  quarrels.  The  greater  permanence  of  his  tenure

gradually strengthened the legate's position, and perhaps an inferior is always

anxious to vie with his betters. The most eminent governors, on the other

hand, were more careful of their comfort than of their authority.

 
At the present time the legion in Africa was commanded by Valerius Festus,

an  extravagant  young  man,  immoderately  ambitious,  whose  kinship  with

Vitellius had given him some anxiety. He had frequent interviews with Piso,

and it is impossible to tell whether he tempted Piso to rebel or resisted Piso's

temptations.  No  one  was  present  at  their  interviews,  which  were  held  in

private, and after Piso's death most people were inclined to sympathize with

his murderer. Beyond doubt the province and the garrison were unfavourable

to Vespasian. Besides, some of the Vitellian refugees from Rome pointed out

to Piso that the Gallic provinces were wavering. Germany was ready to rebel,

and he himself was in danger; 'and,' they added, 'if you earn suspicion in

peace  your  safest  course  is  war.'  Meanwhile,  Claudius  Sagitta,  who

commanded  Petra's  Horse,  made  a  good  crossing  and  outstripped  the

centurion  Papirius,  who  had  been  sent  out  by  Mucianus  and  was

commissioned, so Sagitta affirmed, to assassinate Piso. Sagitta further stated

that Galerianus, Piso's cousin and son-in-law, had already been murdered,and told him that while his one hope lay in taking a bold step, there were two

courses open to him: he might either take up arms on the spot, or he might

prefer to sail to Gaul and offer to lead the Vitellian armies. This made no

impression on Piso. When the centurion whom Mucianus had sent arrived at

the gates of Carthage, he kept on shouting all sorts of congratulations to Piso

on  becoming  emperor.  The  people  he  met,  who  were  astounded  at  this

unexpected miracle, were instructed to take up the cry. With a crowd's usual

credulity, they rushed into the forum calling on Piso to appear, and as they

had a passion for flattery and took no interest in the truth, they proceeded to

fill the whole place with a confused noise of cheering. Piso, however, either

at  a  hint  from  Sagitta,  or  from  his  natural  good  sense,  would  not  show

himself in public or give way to the excitement of the crowd. He examined

the centurion, and learnt that his object was to trump up a charge against him

and  then  kill  him.  He  accordingly  had  the  man  executed  more  from

indignation against the assassin than in any hope of saving his life; for he

found that the man had been one of the murderers of Clodius Macer, and after

staining his hand in the blood of a military officer was now proposing to turn

it against a civil governor. Piso then reprimanded the Carthaginians in an

edict which clearly showed his anxiety, and refrained from performing even

the routine of his office, shutting himself up in his house, for fear that he

might by accident provide some pretext for further demonstrations.

 
When  the  news  of  the  popular  excitement  and  the  centurion's  execution

reached  the  ears  of  Festus,  considerably  exaggerated  and  with  the  usual

admixture of falsehood, he at once sent off a party of horsemen to murder

Piso. Riding at full speed, they reached the governor's house in the twilight of

early dawn and broke in with drawn swords. As Festus had mainly chosen

Carthaginian auxiliaries and Moors to do the murder, most of them did not

know Piso by sight. However, near his bedroom they happened on a slave

and asked him where Piso was and what he looked like. In answer the slave

told them a heroic lie and said he was Piso, whereupon they immediately cut

him down. However, Piso himself was killed very soon after, for there was

one man among them who knew him, and that was Baebius Massa, one of the

imperial agents in Africa, who was already a danger to all the best men in

Rome. His name will recur again and again in this narrative, as one of the

causes of the troubles which beset us later on. Festus had been waiting at

Adrumetum to see how things went, and he now hastened to rejoin his legion.He had the camp-prefect, Caetronius Pisanus, put in irons, alleging that he

was one of Piso's accomplices, though his real motive was personal dislike.

He then punished some of the soldiers and centurions and rewarded others; in

neither case for their deserts, but because he wanted it to be thought that he

had stamped out a war. His next task was to settle the differences between

Oea and Lepcis.

 
These had had a trivial origin in thefts of fruit and cattle by the peasants, but

they were now trying to settle them in open warfare. Oea, being inferior in

numbers, had called in the aid of the Garamantes, an invincible tribe, who

were always a fruitful source of damage to their neighbours. Thus the people

of Lepcis were in great straits. Their fields had been wasted far and wide, and

they  had  fled  in  terror  under  shelter  of  their  walls,  when  the  Roman

auxiliaries,  both  horse  and  foot,  arrived  on  the  scene.  They  routed  the

Garamantes and recovered all the booty, except what the nomads had already

sold among the inaccessible hut-settlements of the far interior.

 
After the battle of Cremona and the arrival of good news from every quarter,

Vespasian now heard of Vitellius' death. A large number of people of all

classes, who were as lucky as they were adventurous, successfully braved the

winter seas on purpose to bring him the news. There also arrived envoys from

King Vologaesus offering the services of forty thousand Parthian cavalry. It

was, indeed, a proud and fortunate situation to be courted with such splendid

offers of assistance, and to need none of them. Vologaesus was duly thanked

and instructed to send his envoys to the senate and to understand that peace

had been made. Vespasian now devoted his attention to the affairs of Italy

and  the  Capitol,  and  received  an  unfavourable  report  of  Domitian,  who

seemed to be trespassing beyond the natural sphere of an emperor's youthful

son. He accordingly handed over the flower of his army to Titus, who was to

finish off the war with the Jews.

 
It is said that before his departure Titus had a long talk with his father and

begged him not to be rash and lose his temper at these incriminating reports,

but to meet his son in a forgiving and unprejudiced spirit, 'Neither legions nor

fleets,' he is reported to have said, 'are such sure bulwarks of the throne as a

number  of  children.  Time,  chance  and  often,  too,  ambition  and

misunderstanding  weaken,  alienate  or  extinguish  friendship:  a  man's  own

blood  cannot  be  severed  from  him;  and  above  all  is  this  the  case  with  asovereign,  for,  while  others  enjoy  his  good  fortune,  his  misfortunes  only

concern his nearest kin. Nor again are brothers likely to remain good friends

unless  their  father  sets  them  an  example.'  These  words  had  the  effect  of

making Vespasian rather delighted at Titus' goodness of heart than inclined to

forgive Domitian. 'You may ease your mind,' he said to Titus, 'It is now your

duty to increase the prestige of Rome on the field: I will concern myself with

peace at home.' Though the weather was still very rough, Vespasian at once

launched his fastest corn-ships with a full cargo. For the city was on the verge

of famine. Indeed, there were not supplies for more than ten days in the

public granaries at the moment when Vespasian's convoy brought relief.

 
The  task  of  restoring  the  Capitol  was  entrusted  to  Lucius  Vestinus,  who,

though only a knight, yet in reputation and influence could rank with the

highest. He summoned all the soothsayers, and they recommended that the

ruins of the former temple should be carried away to the marshes and a new

temple erected on the same site: the gods were unwilling, they said, that the

original form of the building should be changed. On the 21st of June, a day of

bright sun shine, the whole consecrated area of the temple was decorated with

chaplets  and  garlands.  In  marched  soldiers,  all  men  with  names  of  good

omen,  carrying  branches  of  lucky  trees:  then  came  the  Vestal  Virgins

accompanied by boys and girls, each of whom had father and mother alive,

and they cleansed it all by sprinkling fresh water from a spring or river.

 
Next, while the high priest, Plautius Aelianus, dictated the proper formulae,

Helvidius Priscus, the praetor, first consecrated the site by a solemn sacrifice

of a pig, a sheep and an ox, and then duly offering the entrails on an altar of

turf, he prayed to Jupiter, Juno, and Minerva, as the guardian deities of the

empire, to prosper the enterprise, and by divine grace to bring to completion

this house of theirs which human piety had here begun. He then took hold of

the chaplets to which the ropes holding the foundation-stone were attached.

At the same moment the other magistrates and the priests and senators and

knights and large numbers of the populace in joyous excitement with one

great effort dragged the huge stone into its place. On every side gifts of gold

and silver were flung into the foundations, and blocks of virgin ore unscathed

by any furnace, just as they had come from the womb of the earth. For the

soothsayers had given out that the building must not be desecrated by the use

of stone or gold that had been put to any other purpose. The height of the roof

was raised. This was the only change that religious scruples would allow, andit was felt to be the only point in which the former temple lacked grandeur.

 
 

 
                              The Loss of Germany

 
 

 
Meanwhile,  the  news  of  Vitellius'  death  had  spread  through  Gaul  and

Germany  and  redoubled  the  vigour  of  the  war.  Civilis  now  dropped  all

pretence and hurled himself upon the Roman Empire. The Vitellian legions

felt  that  even  foreign  slavery  was  preferable  to  owning  Vespasian's

sovereignty. The Gauls too had taken heart. A rumour had been spread that

our  winter  camps  in  Moesia  and  Pannonia  were  being  blockaded  by

Sarmatians and Dacians: similar stories were fabricated about Britain: the

Gauls began to think that the fortune of the Roman arms was the same all the

world over. But above all, the burning of the Capitol led them to believe that

the empire was coming to an end. 'Once in old days the Gauls had captured

Rome,  but  her  empire  had  stood  firm  since  Jupiter's  high-place  was  left

unscathed. But now, so the Druids with superstitious folly kept dinning into

their ears, this fatal fire was a sign of Heaven's anger, and meant that the

Transalpine  tribes  were  destined  now  to  rule  the  world.'  It  was  also

persistently rumoured that the Gallic chieftains, whom Otho had sent to work

against Vitellius, had agreed, before they parted, that if Rome sank under its

internal troubles in an unbroken sequence of civil wars, they would not fail

the cause of the Gallic freedom.

 
Previous  to  the  murder  of  Hordeonius  Flaccus  nothing  had  leaked  out  to

arouse  suspicions  of  a  conspiracy,  but  when  he  had  been  assassinated,

negotiations  passed  between  Civilis  and  Classicus,  who  commanded  the

Treviran cavalry. Classicus was far above the rest both in birth and in wealth.

He came of royal line and his stock was famous both in peace and war. It was

his boast that his family had given Rome more enemies than allies. These two

were now joined by Julius Tutor and Julius Sabinus, the one a Treviran, the

other a Lingonian. Tutor had been appointed by Vitellius to watch the bank

of  the  Rhine.  Sabinus'  natural  vanity  was  further  inflamed  by  spurious

pretensions of high birth, for he alleged that his great-grandmother's beauty

had caught the fancy of Julius Caesar during the campaign in Gaul, and that

they  had  committed  adultery.  These  four  tested  the  temper  of  the  rest  inprivate  interviews,  and  having  bound  to  the  conspiracy  those  who  were

considered  fit,  they  held  a  conference  at  Cologne  in  a  private  house,  the

general feeling in the city being hostile to such plans as theirs. A few of the

Ubii and Tungri, indeed, attended, but the Treviri and Lingonians were the

backbone of the conspiracy. Nor would they tolerate deliberation or delay.

They vied with each other in protesting that Rome was distracted by internal

quarrels; legions had been cut to pieces, Italy devastated, the city was on the

point of being taken, while all her armies were occupied with wars of their

own in different quarters. They need only garrison the Alps and then, when

liberty had taken firm root, they could discuss together what limit each tribe

should set to its exercise of power.

 
All  this  was  no  sooner  spoken  than  applauded.  About  the  remnant  of

Vitellius' army they were in some doubt. Many held that they ought to be

killed as being treacherous and insubordinate and stained with the blood of

their generals. However, the idea of sparing them carried the day. To destroy

all hope of pardon would only steel their obstinacy: it was much better to

seduce  them  into  alliance:  only  the  generals  need  be  killed;  a  guilty

conscience and the hope of pardon would soon bring the rest flocking over to

their flag. Such was the tenor of their first meeting. Agitators were sent all

over  Gaul  to  stir  up  war.  The  conspirators  themselves  feigned  loyalty  to

Vocula, hoping to catch him off his guard. There were, indeed, traitors who

reported  all  this  to  Vocula,  but  he  was  not  strong  enough  to  crush  the

conspiracy, his legions being short-handed and unreliable. Between suspected

troops on one side and secret enemies on the other, it seemed his best course

under the circumstances to dissemble, as they were doing, and thus use their

own weapons against them. So he marched down the river to Cologne. There

he found Claudius Labeo, who after being taken prisoner, as described above,

and relegated to the Frisii, had bribed his guards and escaped to Cologne. He

promised that if Vocula would provide him with troops, he would go to the

Batavi and win back the better part of their community to the Roman alliance.

He was given a small force of horse and foot. Without venturing any attempt

upon the Batavi, he attracted a few of the Nervii and Baetasii to his standard,

and proceeded to harass the Canninefates and Marsaci more by stealth than

open warfare.

 
Lured by the treachery of the Gauls, Vocula marched out against his enemy.

Not  far  from  Vetera,  Classicus  and  Tutor  rode  forward  on  a  pretext  ofscouting, and ratified their compact with the German leaders. They were now

for the first time separated from the legions, and entrenched themselves in a

camp of their own. At this, Vocula loudly protested that Rome was not as yet

so shattered by civil war as to earn the contempt of tribes like the Treviri and

Lingones. She could still rely on loyal provinces and victorious armies, on

the good fortune of the empire and the avenging hand of God. Thus it was

that in former days Sacrovir and the Aedui, more lately Vindex and the Gallic

provinces had each been crushed at a single battle. Now, again, these treaty-

breakers must expect to face the same powers of Providence and Destiny.

The  sainted  Julius  and  the  sainted  Augustus  had  understood  these  people

better: it was Galba's reduction of the tribute that had clothed them in enmity

and pride. 'They are our enemies to-day because their yoke is easy: when they

have  been  stripped  and  plundered  they  will  be  our  friends.'  After  these

spirited  words,  seeing  that  Classicus  and  Tutor  still  persisted  in  their

treachery,  he  turned  back  and  retired  to  Novaesium,  while  the  Gauls

encamped a couple of miles away. Thither the centurions and soldiers flocked

to  sell  their  souls.  This  was,  indeed,  an  unheard  of  villainy  that  Roman

soldiers should swear allegiance to a foreign power, and offer as a pledge for

this heinous crime either to kill or imprison their generals. Though many

urged  Vocula  to  escape,  he  felt  that  he  must  make  a  bold  stand,  so  he

summoned a meeting and spoke somewhat as follows:—'Never before have I

addressed you with such feelings of anxiety for you, or with such indifference

to  my  own  fate.  That  plans  are  being  laid  for  my  destruction  I  am  glad

enough to hear: in such a parlous case as this I look for death as the end of all

my troubles. It is for you that I feel shame and pity. It is not that a field of

battle awaits you, for that would only accord with the laws of warfare and the

just rights of combatants, but because Classicus hopes that with your hands

he can make war upon the Roman people, and flourishes before you an oath

of allegiance to the Empire of All Gaul. What though fortune and courage

have deserted us for the moment, have we not glorious examples in the past?

How often have not Roman soldiers chosen to die rather than be driven from

their post? Often have our allies endured the destruction of their cities and

given themselves and their wives and children to the flames, without any

other reward for such an end save the name of honourable men. At this very

moment Roman troops are enduring famine and siege at Vetera, and neither

threats nor promises can move them, while we, besides arms and men and

fine fortifications, have supplies enough to last through any length of war.Money,  too—the  other  day  there  was  enough  even  for  a  donative,  and

whether you choose to say that it was given you by Vespasian or by Vitellius,

at any rate you got it from a Roman Emperor. After all the engagements you

have  won,  after  routing  the  enemy  at  Gelduba,  at  Vetera,  it  would  be

shameful enough to shirk battle, but you have your trenches and your walls,

and  there  are  ways  of  gaining  time  until  armies  come  flocking  from  the

neighbouring provinces to your rescue. Granted that you dislike me; well,

there  are  others  to  lead  you,  whether  legate,  tribune,  centurion,  and  even

private soldier. But do not let this portent be trumpeted over the whole world,

that Civilis and Classicus are going to invade Italy with you in their train.

Suppose the Germans and Gauls lead the way to the walls of Rome, will you

turn your arms upon your fatherland? The mere thought of such a crime is

horrible. Will you stand sentry for the Treviran Tutor? Shall a Batavian give

you the signal for battle? Will you swell the ranks of German hordes? And

what will be the issue of your crime, when the Roman legions take the field

against you? Desertion upon desertion, treachery upon treachery! You will be

drifting miserably between the old allegiance and the new, with the curse of

Heaven  on  your  heads.  Almighty  Jupiter,  whom  we  have  worshipped  at

triumph  after  triumph  for  eight  hundred  and  twenty  years;  and  Quirinus,

Father of our Rome, if it be not your pleasure that under my command this

camp be kept clean from the stain of dishonour, grant at the least, I humbly

beseech  ye,  that  it  never  be  defiled  with  the  pollution  of  a  Tutor  or  a

Classicus; and to these soldiers of Rome give either innocence of heart or a

speedy repentance before the harm is done.'

 
The speech was variously received, with feelings fluctuating between hope,

fear, and shame. Vocula withdrew and began to prepare for his end, but his

freedmen  and  slaves  prevented  him  from  forestalling  by  his  own  hand  a

dreadful death. As it was, Classicus dispatched Aemilius Longinus, a deserter

from  the  First  legion,  who  quickly  murdered  him.  For  Herennius  and

Numisius imprisonment was thought sufficient. Classicus then assumed the

uniform  and  insignia  of  a  Roman  general,  and  thus  entered  the  camp.

Hardened though he was to every kind of crime, words failed him, and he

could only read out the oath. Those who were present swore allegiance to the

Empire of All Gaul. He then gave high promotion to Vocula's assassin, and

rewarded the others each according to the villainy of his service.

 
The command was now divided between Tutor and Classicus. Tutor at thehead of a strong force besieged Cologne and forced the inhabitants and all the

soldiers on the Upper Rhine to take the same oath of allegiance. At Mainz he

killed  the  officers  and  drove  away  the  camp-prefect,  who  had  refused  to

swear. Classicus ordered all the greatest scoundrels among the deserters to go

to  Vetera  and  offer  pardon  to  the  besieged  if  they  would  yield  to

circumstances:  otherwise  there  was  no  hope  for  them:  they  should  suffer

famine and sword and every extremity. The messengers further cited their

own example.

 
Torn by a conflict of loyalty and hunger, the besieged vacillated between

honour and disgrace. While they hesitated, all their sources of food, both

usual and unusual, began to fail them. They had eaten their mules and horses

and all the other animals which, though foul and unclean, their straits had

forced into use. At last they took to grubbing up the shrubs and roots and the

grass that grew between the stones, and became a very pattern of endurance

in  wretchedness,  until  at  last  they  soiled  their  glory  by  a  shameful  end.

Envoys were sent to Civilis begging him to save their lives. Even then he

refused to receive their petition until they had sworn allegiance to All Gaul.

He then negotiated for the plunder of the camp and sent guards, some to

secure  the  money,  servants  and  baggage,  and  others  to  conduct  the  men

themselves out of the camp with empty hands. About five miles down the

road their line was surprised by an ambush of Germans. The bravest fell on

the spot; many were cut down in flight; the rest got back to camp. Civilis,

indeed,  complained  that  the  Germans  had  criminally  broken  faith  and

rebuked them for it. There is no evidence to show whether this was a pretence

or whether he was really unable to restrain his savage troops. The camp was

plundered and burnt, and all who had survived the battle were devoured by

the flames.

 
When Civilis first took up arms against Rome he made a vow, such as is

common with barbarians, to let his ruddled hair grow wild; now that he had at

last accomplished the destruction of the legions he had it cut. It is said also

that he put up some of the prisoners for his little son to shoot in sport with

javelins  and  arrows.  However  that  may  be,  he  did  not  himself  swear

allegiance to All Gaul, nor did he force any of the Batavi to do so. He felt that

he could rely on the strength of the Germans, and that if any quarrel arose

with the Gauls about the empire, his fame would give him an advantage.

Munius Lupercus, one of the Roman commanding-officers, was sent amongother presents to Veleda, a virgin of the Bructeran tribe who wielded a wide-

spread authority.

 
It  is  an  ancient  custom  in  Germany  to  credit  a  number  of  women  with

prophetic  powers,  and  with  the  growth  of  superstition  these  develop  into

goddesses. At this moment Veleda's influence was at its height, for she had

prophesied the success of the Germans and the destruction of the Roman

army. However, Lupercus was killed on the journey. A few of the centurions

and officers who had been born in Gaul were detained as a security for good

faith.  The  winter  camps  of  the  legions  and  of  the  auxiliary  infantry  and

cavalry were all dismantled and burnt, with the sole exception of those at

Mainz and Vindonissa.

 
The Sixteenth legion and the auxiliary troops who had surrendered with it

now received orders to migrate from their quarters at Novaesium to Trier, and

a  date  was  fixed  by  which  they  had  to  leave  their  camp.  They  spent  the

meantime brooding on various anxieties, the cowards all shuddering at the

precedent of the massacre at Vetera, the better sort covered with shame at

their disgrace. 'What sort of a march would this be? Whom would they have

to lead them? Everything would be decided by the will of those into whose

hands they had put their lives.' Others, again, were quite indifferent to the

disgrace, and simply stowed all their money and most cherished possessions

about their persons, while many got their armour ready and buckled on their

swords, as if for battle. While they were still busy with these preparations the

hour  struck  for  their  departure,  and  it  proved  more  bitter  than  they  had

expected. Inside the trenches their disgrace was not so noticeable. The open

country and the light of day revealed their depth of shame. The emperors'

medallions had been torn down and their standards desecrated, while Gallic

ensigns glittered all around them. They marched in silence, like a long funeral

procession, led by Claudius Sanctus, a man whose sinister appearance—he

had lost one eye—was only surpassed by his weakness of intellect. Their

disgrace was doubled when they were joined by the First legion, who had left

their camp at Bonn. The famous news of their capture had spread, and all the

people who shortly before had trembled at the very name of Rome, now came

flocking out from fields and houses, and scattered far and wide in transports

of joy at this unwonted sight. Their insulting glee was too much for 'The

Picenum Horse'. Defying all Sanctus' threats and promises, they turned off to

Mainz, and coming by chance upon Longinus, the man who killed Vocula,they slew him with a shower of javelins and thus made a beginning of future

amends. The legions, without changing their route, came and camped before

the walls of Trier.

 
Highly elated by their success, Civilis and Classicus debated whether they

should allow their troops to sack Cologne. Their natural savagery and lust for

plunder inclined them to destroy the town, but policy forbade; and they felt

that in inaugurating a new empire a reputation for clemency would be an

asset. Civilis was also moved by the memory of a past service, for at the

beginning of the outbreak his son had been arrested in Cologne, and they had

kept him in honourable custody. However, the tribes across the Rhine were

jealous of this rich and rising community, and held that the war could only be

ended  either  by  throwing  the  settlement  open  to  all  Germans  without

distinction or by destroying it and thereby dispersing the Ubii together with

its other inhabitants.

 
Accordingly  the  Tencteri,  their  nearest  neighbours  across  the  Rhine,

dispatched a deputation to lay a message before a public meeting of the town.

This was delivered by the haughtiest of the delegates in some such terms as

these:—'We  give  thanks  to  the  national  gods  of  Germany  and  above  all

others, to the god of war, that you are again incorporate in the German nation

and the German name, and we congratulate you that you will now at last

become free members of a free community. Until to-day the Romans had

closed to us the roads and rivers, and almost the very air of heaven, to prevent

all intercourse between us; or else they offered a still fouler insult to born

warriors, that we should meet under supervision, unarmed and almost naked,

and  should  pay  for  the  privilege.  Now,  that  our  friendly  alliance  may  be

ratified for all eternity, we demand of you that you pull down those bulwarks

of slavery, the walls of your town, for even wild beasts lose their spirit if you

keep them caged: that you put to the sword every Roman on your soil, since

tyrants are incompatible with freedom; that all the property of those killed

form a common stock and no one be allowed to conceal anything or to secure

any private advantage. It must also be open both for us and for you to live on

either river-bank, as our forefathers could in earlier days. As daylight is the

natural heritage of all mankind, so the land of the world is free to all brave

men. Resume again the customs and manners of your own country and throw

off those luxurious habits which enslave Rome's subjects far more effectively

than Roman arms. Then, grown simple and uncorrupt, you will forget yourpast slavery and either know none but equals or hold empire over others.'

 
The townspeople took time to consider these proposals, and, feeling that their

apprehensions  for  the  future  forbade  them  to  assent,  while  their  present

circumstances  forbade  them  to  return  a  plain  negative,  they  answered  as

follows: 'We have seized our first opportunity of freedom with more haste

than prudence, because we wanted to join hands with you and all our other

German kinsmen. As for our town-walls, seeing that the Roman armies are

massing at this moment, it would be safer for us to heighten them than to pull

them down. All the foreigners from Italy or the provinces who lived on our

soil have either perished in the war or fled to their own homes. As for the

original settlers, who are united to us by ties of marriage, they and their

offspring regard this as their home, and we do not think you are so unreason

able as to ask us to kill our parents and brothers and children. All taxes and

commercial  restrictions  we  remit.  We  grant  you  free  entry  without

supervision, but you must come in daylight and unarmed, while these ties

which are still strange and new are growing into a long-established custom.

As arbitrators we will appoint Civilis and Veleda, and we will ratify our

compact in their presence.'

 
Thus  the  Tencteri  were  pacified.  A  deputation  was  sent  with  presents  to

Civilis and Veleda, and obtained all that the people of Cologne desired. They

were not, however, allowed to approach and speak to Veleda or even to see

her, but were kept at a distance to inspire in them the greater awe. She herself

lived at the top of a high tower, and one of her relatives was appointed to

carry all the questions and answers like a mediator between God and man.

 
Now that he had gained the accession of Cologne, Civilis determined to win

over the neighbouring communities or to declare war in case of opposition.

He reduced the Sunuci and formed their fighting strength into cohorts, but

then found his advance barred by Claudius Labeo at the head of a hastily-

recruited band of Baetasii, Tungri, and Nervii. He had secured the bridge

over the Maas and relied on the strength of his position. A skirmish in the

narrow defile proved indecisive, until the Germans swam across and took

Labeo  in  the  rear.  At  this  point  Civilis  by  a  bold  move—or  possibly  by

arrangement—rode into the lines of the Tungri and called out in a loud voice,

'Our object in taking up arms is not to secure empire for the Batavi and

Treviri over other tribes. We are far from any such arrogance. Take us asallies. I am come to join you; whether as general or as private it is for you to

choose.'  This  had  a  great  effect  on  the  common  soldiers,  who  began  to

sheathe their swords. Then two of their chieftains, Campanus and Juvenalis,

surrendered the entire tribe. Labeo escaped before he was surrounded. Civilis

also received the allegiance of the Baetasii and Nervii, and added their forces

to his own. His power was now immense, for all the Gallic communities were

either terrified or ready to offer willing support.

 
In the meantime, Julius Sabinus, who had destroyed every memorial of the

Roman alliance, assumed the title of Caesar and proceeded to hurry a large

unwieldy  horde  of  his  tribesmen  against  the  Sequani,  a  neighbouring

community, faithful to Rome. The Sequani accepted battle: the good cause

prospered: the Lingones were routed. Sabinus fled the field with the same

rash haste with which he had plunged into battle. Wishing to spread a rumour

of  his  death,  he  took  refuge  in  a  house  and  set  fire  to  it,  and  was  thus

supposed to have perished by his own act. We shall, however, relate in due

course the devices by which he lay in hiding and prolonged his life for nine

more years, and allude also to the loyalty of his friends and the memorable

example set by his wife Epponina.

 
 

 
                              The Ebb-tide of Revolt

 
 

 
This success on the part of the Sequani checked the rising flood. The Gallic

communities gradually came to their senses and began to remember their

obligations  as  allies.  In  this  movement  the  Remi  took  the  lead.  They

circulated a notice throughout Gaul, summoning a meeting of delegates to

consider whether liberty or peace was the preferable alternative.

 
At Rome, however, all these disasters were exaggerated, and Mucianus began

to feel anxious. He had already appointed Annius Gallus and Petilius Cerialis

to the chief command, and distinguished officers as they were, he was afraid

the conduct of such a war might be too much for them. Moreover, he could

not  leave  Rome  without  government,  but  he  was  afraid  of  Domitian's

unbridled passions, while, as we have already seen, he suspected Antonius

Primus and Arrius Varus. Varus, as commanding the Guards, still had thechief power and influence in his hands. Mucianus accordingly displaced him,

but, as a compensation, made him Director of the Corn-supply. As he had

also to placate Domitian, who was inclined to support Varus, he appointed to

the command of the Guards Arrecinus Clemens, who was connected with

Vespasian's family and very friendly with Domitian. He also impressed it

upon  Domitian  that  Clemens'  father  had  filled  this  command  with  great

distinction under Caligula: that his name and his character would both find

favour with the troops, and that, although he was a member of the senate, he

was quite able to fill both positions. He then chose his staff, some as being

the  most  eminent  men  in  the  country,  others  as  recommended  by  private

influence.

 
Thus  both  Domitian  and  Mucianus  made  ready  to  start,  but  with  very

different feelings. Domitian was full of the sanguine haste of youth, while

Mucianus kept devising delays to check this enthusiasm. He was afraid that if

Domitian once seized control of an army, his youthful self-assurance and his

bad advisers would lead him into action prejudicial both to peace and war.

Three victorious legions, the Eighth, Eleventh, and Thirteenth; the Twenty-

first—one  of  Vitellius'  legions—and  the  Second,  which  had  been  newly

enrolled, all started for the front, some by way of the Poenine and Cottian

Alps, others over the Graian Alps. The Fourteenth was also summoned from

Britain, and the Sixth and First from Spain.

 
The rumour that this force was on its way, combined with the present temper

of the Gauls, inclined them to adopt a sober policy. Their delegates now met

in  the  territory  of  the  Remi,  where  they  found  the  representatives  of  the

Treviri awaiting them. One of these, Julius Valentinus, who was the keenest

instigator  of  a  hostile  policy,  delivered  a  set  speech,  in  which  he  heaped

spiteful aspersions on the Roman people, making all the charges which are

usually brought against great empires. He was a clever agitator, whose mad

rhetoric made him popular with the crowd.

 
However, Julius Auspex, a chieftain of the Remi, enlarged upon the power of

Rome and the blessings of peace. 'Any coward can begin a war,' he said, 'but

it is the brave who run the risks of its conduct: and here are the legions

already upon us.' Thus he restrained them, awakening a sense of duty in all

the sager breasts, and appealing to the fears of the younger men. So, while

applauding Valentinus' courage, they followed the advice of Auspex. The factthat  in  Vindex's  rising  the  Treviri  and  Lingones  sided  with  Verginius  is

known to have told against them in Gaul. Many, too, were held back by tribal

jealousy. They wanted to know where the head-quarters of the war would be,

to whom were they to look for auspices and orders, and, if all went well,

which town would be chosen as the seat of government. Thus dissension

preceded  victory.  They  angrily  magnified,  some  their  great  connexions,

others their wealth and strength, others their antiquity, until they grew tired of

discussing the future and voted for the existing state of things. Letters were

written to the Treviri in the name of All Gaul, bidding them cease hostilities,

suggesting,  however,  that  pardon  might  be  obtained,  and  that  many  were

ready to plead their cause if they showed repentance. Valentinus opposed this

mandate and made his tribesmen offer a deaf ear to it. He was always less

anxious to organize a campaign than to make speeches on every possible

occasion.

 
The result was that neither the Treviri nor the Lingones nor the other rebel

tribes behaved as if aware of the serious risks they were undertaking. Even

the leaders did not act in concert. Civilis wandered over the wilds of the

Belgic country, trying to catch or expel Claudius Labeo. Classicus ordinarily

took his ease, apparently enjoying the fruits of empire. Even Tutor seemed in

no hurry to garrison the Upper Rhine and block the Alpine passes. In the

meantime,  the  Twenty-first  legion  made  its  way  down  from  Vindonissa,

while Sextilius Felix advanced through Raetia with some auxiliary cohorts.

These were joined by the 'Picked Horse', a force that had been raised by

Vitellius and then deserted to Vespasian. This was commanded by Civilis'

nephew, Julius Briganticus, for uncle and nephew hated each other with all

the aggravated bitterness of near relatives. Tutor swelled his force of Treviri

with  fresh  levies  from  the  Vangiones,  Triboci,  and  Caeracates,  and  a

stiffening  of  Roman  veterans,  both  horse  and  foot,  who  had  either  been

bribed or intimidated. These first cut up an auxiliary cohort sent forward by

Sextilius Felix, but on the advance of the Roman army with its generals they

loyally  deserted  to  their  old  flag,  and  were  followed  by  the  Triboci,

Vangiones, and Caeracates. Tutor, followed by his Treviri, avoided Mainz

and fell back on Bingium, relying on his position there, as he had broken

down the bridge over the river Nava. However, Sextilius' cohorts followed

him up; some traitor showed them a ford; Tutor was routed. This disaster was

a crushing blow to the Treviri. The rank and file dropped their weapons andtook to the fields, while some of their chieftains, hoping it might be thought

that they had been the first to lay down arms, took refuge among tribes who

had  never  repudiated  the  Roman  alliance.  The  legions  which  had  been

moved,  as  we  saw  above,  from  Novaesium  and  Bonn  to  Trier,  now

administered  to  themselves  the  oath  of  allegiance  to  Vespasian.  This

happened  in  Valentinus'  absence.  When  he  arrived  in  furious  excitement,

ready to spread universal ruin and confusion, the legions withdrew into the

friendly  territory  of  the  Mediomatrici.  Valentinus  and  Tutor  then  led  the

Treviri  forcibly  back  into  the  field,  but  first  they  killed  the  two  Roman

officers, Herennius and Numisius. By diminishing the hope of pardon they

tried to cement their bond of crime.

 
Such  was  the  position  when  Petilius  Cerialis  reached  Mainz.  His  arrival

roused  high  hopes.  He  was  himself  thirsting  for  battle,  and  being  always

better at despising his enemy than at taking precautions, he fired his men by

delivering a spirited harangue, promising that directly there was a chance of

getting  into  touch  with  the  enemy  he  would  engage  without  delay.  He

dismissed the Gallic recruits to their homes with a message that the legions

were enough for his task: the allies could resume their peaceful occupations,

feeling assured that the war was practically ended, now that Roman troops

had taken it in hand. This action rendered the Gauls all the more tractable.

They made less difficulty about the war-tax, now that they had got their men

back again, while his disdain only sharpened their sense of duty. On the other

side, when Civilis and Classicus heard of Tutor's defeat, the destruction of the

Treviri, and the universal success of the Roman arms, they fell into a panic,

hastily mobilized their own scattered forces, and kept sending messages to

Valentinus  not  to  risk  a  decisive  battle.  This  only  hastened  Cerialis'

movements. He sent guides to the legions stationed in the country of the

Mediomatrici to lead them by the shortest route on the enemy's rear. Then,

assembling all the troops to be found in Mainz together with his own force,

he marched in three days to Rigodulum. Here, on a spot protected by the

mountains on one side and the Moselle on the other, Valentinus had already

taken his stand with a large force of Treviri. His camp had been strengthened

with trenches and stone barricades, but these fortifications had no terrors for

the Roman general. He ordered the infantry to force the position in front,

while the cavalry were to ascend the hill. Valentinus' hurriedly assembled

forces filled him with contempt, for he knew that whatever advantage theirposition might give them, the superior morale of his men would outweigh it.

A short delay was necessary while the cavalry climbed the hill, exposed to

the enemy's fire. But when the fight began, the Treviri tumbled headlong

down the hill like a house falling. Some of our cavalry, who had ridden round

by  an  easier  gradient,  captured  several  Belgic  chieftains,  including  their

general, Valentinus.

 
On the next day Cerialis entered Trier. The troops clamoured greedily for its

destruction. 'It was the native town of Classicus and of Tutor: these were the

men who had wickedly entrapped and slaughtered the legions. Its guilt was

far worse than that of Cremona, which had been wiped off the face of Italy

for  causing  the  victors  a  single  night's  delay.  Was  the  chief  seat  of  the

rebellion to be left standing untouched on the German frontier, glorying in

the spoil of Roman armies and the blood of Roman generals? The plunder

could go to the Imperial Treasury. It would be enough for them to see the

rebel  town  in  smoking  ruins;  that  would  be  some  compensation  for  the

destruction of so many camps.' Cerialis was afraid of soiling his reputation if

it was said that he gave his men a taste for cruelty and riot, so he suppressed

their indignation. They obeyed him, too, for now that civil war was done

with, there was less insubordination on foreign service. Their thoughts were

now distracted by the pitiful plight of the legions who had been summoned

from the country of the Mediomatrici. Miserably conscious of their guilt, they

stood with eyes rooted to the ground. When the armies met, they raised no

cheer: they had no answer for those who offered comfort and encouragement:

they  skulked  in  their  tents,  shunning  the  light  of  day.  It  was  not  fear  of

punishment so much as the shame of their disgrace which thus overwhelmed

them. Even the victorious army showed their bewilderment: hardly venturing

to make an audible petition, they craved pardon for them with silent tears. At

length  Cerialis  soothed  their  alarm.  He  insisted  that  all  disasters  due  to

dissension between officers and men, or to the enemy's guile, were to be

regarded as 'acts of destiny'. They were to count this as their first day of

service and sworn allegiance. Neither he nor the emperor would remember

past misdeeds. He then gave them quarters in his own camp, and sent round

orders that no one in the heat of any quarrel should taunt a fellow soldier with

mutiny or defeat.

 
Cerialis next summoned the Treviri and Lingones, and addressed them as

follows: 'Unpractised as I am in public speaking, for it is only on the fieldthat I have asserted the superiority of Rome, yet since words have so much

weight with you, and since you distinguish good and bad not by the light of

facts but by what agitators tell you, I have decided to make a few remarks,

which, as the war is practically over, are likely to be more profitable to the

audience than to ourselves. Roman generals and officers originally set foot in

your country and the rest of Gaul from no motives of ambition, but at the call

of your ancestors, who were worn almost to ruin by dissension. The Germans

whom one party summoned to their aid had forced the yoke of slavery on

allies and enemies alike. You know how often we fought against the Cimbri

and the Teutons, with what infinite pains and with what striking success our

armies have undertaken German wars. All that is notorious. And to-day it is

not to protect Italy that we have occupied the Rhine, but to prevent some

second Ariovistus making himself master of All Gaul. Do you imagine that

Civilis and his Batavi and the other tribes across the Rhine care any more

about you than their ancestors cared about your fathers and grandfathers? The

Germans have always had the same motives for trespassing into Gaul—their

greed for gain and their desire to change homes with you. They wanted to

leave  their  marshes  and  deserts,  and  to  make  themselves  masters  of  this

magnificently  fertile  soil  and  of  you  who  live  on  it.  Of  course  they  use

specious pretexts and talk about liberty. No one has ever wanted to enslave

others and play the tyrant without making use of the very same phrases.

 
'Tyranny and warfare were always rife throughout the length and breadth of

Gaul,  until  you  accepted  Roman  government.  Often  as  we  have  been

provoked, we have never imposed upon you any burden by right of conquest,

except what was necessary to maintain peace. Tribes cannot be kept quiet

without troops. You cannot have troops without pay; and you cannot raise

pay without taxation. In every other respect you are treated as our equals.

You frequently command our legions yourselves: you govern this and other

provinces yourselves. We have no exclusive privileges. Though you live so

far away, you enjoy the blessings of a good emperor no less than we do,

whereas the tyrant only oppresses his nearest neighbours. You must put up

with luxury and greed in your masters, just as you put up with bad crops or

excessive  rain,  or  any  other  natural  disaster.  Vice  will  last  as  long  as

mankind.  But  these  evils  are  not  continual.  There  are  intervals  of  good

government,  which  make  up  for  them.  You  cannot  surely  hope  that  the

tyranny of Tutor and Classicus would mean milder government, or that theywill need less taxation for the armies they will have to raise to keep the

Germans  and  Britons  at  bay.  For  if  the  Romans  were  driven  out—which

Heaven  forbid—what  could  ensue  save  a  universal  state  of  intertribal

warfare? During eight hundred years, by good fortune and good organization,

the  structure  of  empire  has  been  consolidated.  It  cannot  be  pulled  down

without destroying those who do it. And it is you who would run the greatest

risk of all, since you have gold and rich resources, which are the prime causes

of war. You must learn, then, to love and foster peace and the city of Rome in

which you, the vanquished, have the same rights as your conquerors. You

have tried both conditions. Take warning, then, that submission and safety

are better than rebellion and ruin.' By such words as these he quieted and

reassured his audience, who had been afraid of more rigorous measures.

 
While the victors were occupying Trier, Civilis and Classicus sent a letter to

Cerialis, the gist of which was that Vespasian was dead, though the news was

being suppressed: Rome and Italy were exhausted by civil war: Mucianus and

Domitian were mere names with no power behind them: if Cerialis desired to

be emperor of All Gaul, they would be satisfied with their own territory: but

if he should prefer battle, that, too, they would not deny him. Cerialis made

no  answer  to  Civilis  and  Classicus,  but  sent  the  letter  and  its  bearer  to

Domitian.

 
The enemy now approached Trier from every quarter in detached bands, and

Cerialis was much criticized for allowing them to unite, when he might have

cut them off one by one. The Roman army now threw a trench and rampart

round  their  camp,  for  they  had  rashly  settled  in  it  without  seeing  to  the

fortifications.  In  the  German  camp  different  opinions  were  being  keenly

debated. Civilis contended that they should wait for the tribes from across the

Rhine, whose arrival would spread a panic sufficient to crush the enfeebled

forces  of  the  Romans.  The  Gauls,  he  urged,  were  simply  a  prey  for  the

winning side and, as it was, the Belgae, who were their sole strength, had

declared for him or were at least sympathetic. Tutor maintained that delay

only strengthened the Roman force, since their armies were converging from

every quarter. 'They have brought one legion across from Britain, others have

been summoned from Spain, or are on their way from Italy. Nor are they raw

recruits, but experienced veterans, while the Germans, on whose aid we rely,

are subject to no discipline or control, but do whatever they like. You can

only bribe them with presents of money, and the Romans have the advantageof us there: besides, however keen to fight, a man always prefers peace to

danger,  so  long  as  the  pay  is  the  same.  But  if  we  engage  them  at  once,

Cerialis has nothing but the remnants of the German army, who have sworn

allegiance to the Gallic Empire. The very fact that they have just won an

unexpected victory over Valentinus' undisciplined bands serves to confirm

them and their general in imprudence. They will venture out again and will

fall,  not  into  the  hands  of  an  inexperienced  boy,  who  knows  more  about

making speeches than war, but into the hands of Civilis and Classicus, at the

sight of whom they will recall their fears and their flights and their famine,

and remember how often they have had to beg their lives from their captors.

Nor, again, is it any liking for the Romans that keeps back the Treviri and

Lingones: they will fly to arms again, when once their fears are dispelled.'

Classicus finally settled the difference of opinion by declaring for Tutor's

policy, and they promptly proceeded to carry it out.

 
The Ubii and Lingones were placed in the centre, the Batavian cohorts on the

right, and on the left the Bructeri and Tencteri. Advancing, some by the hills

and some by the path between the road and the river, they took us completely

by surprise. So sudden was their onslaught that Cerialis, who had not spent

the night in camp, was still in bed when he heard almost simultaneously that

the fighting had begun and that the day was lost. He cursed the messengers

for their cowardice until he saw the whole extent of the disaster with his own

eyes. The camp had been forced, the cavalry routed, and the bridge over the

Moselle, leading to the outskirts of the town, which lay between him and his

army,  was  held  by  the  enemy.  But  confusion  had  no  terrors  for  Cerialis.

Seizing hold on fugitives, flinging himself without any armour into the thick

of the fire, he succeeded by his inspired imprudence and the assistance of the

braver  men  in  retaking  the  bridge.  Leaving  a  picked  band  to  hold  it,  he

hurried back to the camp, where he found that the companies of the legions

which had surrendered at Bonn and Novaesium were all broken up, few men

were left at their posts, and the eagles were all but surrounded by the enemy.

He turned on them in blazing anger, 'It is not Flaccus or Vocula that you are

deserting. There is no "treason" about me. I have done nothing to be ashamed

of,  except  that  I  was  rash  enough  to  believe  that  you  had  forgotten  your

Gallic ties and awakened to the memory of your Roman allegiance. Am I to

be numbered with Numisius and Herennius? Then you can say that all your

generals have fallen either by your hands or the enemy's. Go and tell the newsto Vespasian, or rather, to Civilis and Classicus—they are nearer at hand—

that you have deserted your general on the field of battle. There will yet come

legions who will not leave me unavenged or you unpunished.'

 
All he said was true, and the other officers heaped the same reproaches on

their heads. The men were drawn up in cohorts and companies, since it was

impossible to deploy with the enemy swarming round them, and, the fight

being inside the rampart, the tents and baggage were a serious encumbrance.

Tutor and Classicus and Civilis, each at his post, were busy rallying their

forces, appealing to the Gauls to fight for freedom, the Batavians for glory,

and the Germans for plunder. Everything, indeed, went well for the enemy

until the Twenty-first legion, who had rallied in a clearer space than any of

the  others,  first  sustained  their  charge  and  then  repulsed  them.  Then,  by

divine providence, on the very point of victory the enemy suddenly lost their

nerve  and  turned  tail.  They  themselves  attributed  their  panic  to  the

appearance of the Roman auxiliaries, who, after being scattered by the first

charge,  formed  again  on  the  hill-tops  and  were  taken  for  fresh

reinforcements. However, what really cost the Gauls their victory was that

they let their enemy alone and indulged in ignoble squabbles over the spoil.

Thus after Cerialis' carelessness had almost caused disaster, his pluck now

saved the day, and he followed up his success by capturing the enemy's camp

and destroying it before nightfall.

 
Cerialis' troops were allowed short respite. Cologne was clamouring for help

and offering to surrender Civilis' wife and sister and Classicus' daughter, who

had been left behind there as pledges of the alliance. In the meantime the

inhabitants had massacred all the stray Germans to be found in the town.

They were now alarmed at this, and had good reason to implore aid before

the enemy should recover their strength and bethink themselves of victory, or

at any rate of revenge. Indeed, Civilis already had designs on Cologne, and

he was still formidable, for the most warlike of his cohorts, composed of

Chauci and Frisii, was still in full force at Tolbiacum, within the territory of

Cologne. However, he changed his plans on receiving the bitter news that this

force had been entrapped and destroyed by the inhabitants of Cologne. They

had entertained them at a lavish banquet, drugged them with wine, shut the

doors upon them and burned the place to the ground. At the same moment

Cerialis came by forced marches to the relief of Cologne. A further anxiety

haunted Civilis. He was afraid that the Fourteenth legion, in conjunction withthe  fleet  from  Britain,  might  harry  the  Batavian  coast.  However,  Fabius

Priscus, who was in command, led his troops inland into the country of the

Nervii  and  Tungri,  who  surrendered  to  him.  The  Canninefates  made  an

unprovoked attack upon the fleet and sank or captured the greater number of

the ships. They also defeated a band of Nervian volunteers who had been

recruited in the Roman interest. Classicus secured a further success against an

advance-guard  of  cavalry  which  Cerialis  had  sent  forward  to  Novaesium.

These repeated checks, though unimportant in themselves, served to dim the

lustre of the recent Roman victory.

 
 

 
                          Events in Rome and in the East

 
 

 
It was about this time that Mucianus gave orders for the murder of Vitellius'

son, on the plea that dissension would continue until all the seeds of war were

stamped  out.  He  also  refused  to  allow  Antonius  Primus  to  go  out  on

Domitian's staff, being alarmed at his popularity among the troops and at the

man's  own  vanity,  which  would  brook  no  equal,  much  less  a  superior.

Antonius accordingly went to join Vespasian, whose reception, though not

hostile, proved a disappointment. The emperor was drawn two ways. On the

one side were Antonius' services: it was undeniable that his generalship had

ended  the  war.  In  the  other  scale  were  Mucianus'  letters.  Besides  which,

every one else seemed ready to rake up the scandals of his past life and

inveigh against his vanity and bad temper. Antonius himself did his best to

provoke hostility by expatiating to excess on his services, decrying the other

generals as incompetent cowards, and stigmatizing Caecina as a prisoner who

had surrendered. Thus without any open breach of friendship he gradually

declined lower and lower in the emperor's favour.

 
During  the  months  which  Vespasian  spent  at  Alexandria  waiting  for  the

regular season of the summer winds to ensure a safe voyage, there occurred

many miraculous events manifesting the goodwill of Heaven and the special

favour of Providence towards him. At Alexandria a poor workman who was

well known to have a disease of the eye, acting on the advice of Serapis,

whom this superstitious people worship as their chief god, fell at Vespasian's

feet demanding with sobs a cure for his blindness, and imploring that theemperor would deign to moisten his eyes and eyeballs with the spittle from

his  mouth.  Another  man  with  a  maimed  hand,  also  inspired  by  Serapis,

besought Vespasian to imprint his footmark on it. At first Vespasian laughed

at them and refused. But they insisted. Half fearing to be thought a fool, half

stirred  to  hopes  by  their  petition  and  by  the  flattery  of  his  courtiers,  he

eventually  told  the  doctors  to  form  an  opinion  whether  such  cases  of

blindness and deformity could be remedied by human aid. The doctors talked

round the question, saying that in the one case the power of sight was not

extinct and would return, if certain impediments were removed; in the other

case the limbs were distorted and could be set right again by the application

of an effective remedy: this might be the will of Heaven and the emperor had

perhaps been chosen as the divine instrument. They added that he would gain

all the credit, if the cure were successful, while, if it failed, the ridicule would

fall on the unfortunate patients. This convinced Vespasian that there were no

limits to his destiny: nothing now seemed incredible. To the great excitement

of the bystanders, he stepped forward with a smile on his face and did as the

men desired him. Immediately the hand recovered its functions and daylight

shone once more in the blind man's eyes. Those who were present still attest

both miracles to-day, when there is nothing to gain by lying.

 
This  occurrence  deepened  Vespasian's  desire  to  visit  the  holy-place  and

consult Serapis about the fortunes of the empire. He gave orders that no one

else was to be allowed in the temple, and then went in. While absorbed in his

devotions, he suddenly saw behind him an Egyptian noble, named Basilides,

whom he knew to be lying ill several days' journey from Alexandria. He

inquired of the priests whether Basilides had entered the temple that day. He

inquired of every one he met whether he had been seen in the city. Eventually

he sent some horsemen, who discovered that at the time Basilides was eighty

miles  away.  Vespasian  therefore  took  what  he  had  seen  for  a  divine

apparition, and guessed the meaning of the oracle from the name 'Basilides'.

 
The origins of the god Serapis are not given in any Roman authorities. The

high-priests of Egypt give the following account: King Ptolemy, who was the

first of the Macedonians to put the power of Egypt on a firm footing, was

engaged in building walls and temples, and instituting religious cults for his

newly founded city of Alexandria, when there appeared to him in his sleep a

young man of striking beauty and supernatural stature, who warned him to

send his most faithful friends to Pontus to fetch his image. After adding thatthis would bring luck to the kingdom, and that its resting-place would grow

great and famous, he appeared to be taken up into heaven in a sheet of flame.

Impressed by this miraculous prophecy, Ptolemy revealed his vision to the

priests of Egypt, who are used to interpreting such things. As they had but

little  knowledge  of  Pontus  or  of  foreign  cults,  he  consulted  an  Athenian

named Timotheus, a member of the Eumolpid clan, whom he had brought

over from Eleusis to be overseer of religious ceremonies, and asked him what

worship  and  what  god  could  possibly  be  meant.  Timotheus  found  some

people who had travelled in Pontus and learnt from them, that near a town

called  Sinope  there  was  a  temple,  which  had  long  been  famous  in  the

neighbourhood as the seat of Jupiter-Pluto, and near it there also stood a

female  figure,  which  was  commonly  called  Proserpine.  Ptolemy  was  like

most despots, easily terrified at first, but liable, when his panic was over, to

think more of his pleasures than of his religious duties. The incident was

gradually forgotten, and other thoughts occupied his mind until the vision

was repeated in a more terrible and impressive form than before, and he was

threatened with death and the destruction of his kingdom if he failed to fulfil

his instructions. He at once gave orders that representatives should be sent

with presents to King Scydrothemis, who was then reigning at Sinope, and on

their departure he instructed them to consult the oracle of Apollo at Delphi.

They made a successful voyage and received a clear answer from the oracle:

they were to go and bring back the image of Apollo's father but leave his

sister's behind.

 
On their arrival at Sinope they laid their presents, their petition, and their

king's instructions before Scydrothemis. He was in some perplexity. He was

afraid of the god and yet alarmed by the threats of his subjects, who opposed

the project: then, again, he often felt tempted by the envoys' presents and

promises. Three years passed. Ptolemy's zeal never abated for a moment. He

persisted  in  his  petition,  and  kept  sending  more  and  more  distinguished

envoys,  more  ships,  more  gold.  Then  a  threatening  vision  appeared  to

Scydrothemis, bidding him no longer thwart the god's design. When he still

hesitated, he was beset by every kind of disease and disaster: the gods were

plainly angry and their hand was heavier upon him every day. He summoned

an assembly and laid before it the divine commands, his own and Ptolemy's

visions, and the troubles with which they were visited. The king found the

people unfavourable. They were jealous of Egypt and fearful of their ownfuture.  So  they  surged  angrily  round  the  temple.  The  story  now  grows

stranger still. The god himself, it says, embarked unaided on one of the ships

that lay beached on the shore, and by a miracle accomplished the long sea-

journey and landed at Alexandria within three days. A temple worthy of so

important a city was then built in the quarter called Rhacotis, on the site of an

ancient temple of Serapis and Isis. This is the most widely accepted account

of the god's origin and arrival. Some people, I am well aware, maintain that

the god was brought from the Syrian town of Seleucia during the reign of

Ptolemy, the third of that name. Others, again, say it was this same Ptolemy,

but make the place of origin the famous town of Memphis, once the bulwark

of  ancient  Egypt.  Many  take  the  god  for  Aesculapius,  because  he  cures

disease:  others  for  Osiris,  the  oldest  of  the  local  gods;  some,  again,  for

Jupiter, as being the sovereign lord of the world. But the majority of people,

either judging by what are clearly attributes of the god or by an ingenious

process of conjecture, identify him with Pluto.

 
Domitian and Mucianus were now on their way to the Alps. Before reaching

the mountains they received the good news of the victory over the Treviri, the

truth of which was fully attested by the presence of their leader Valentinus.

His courage was in no way crushed and his face still bore witness to the

proud spirit he had shown. He was allowed a hearing, merely to see what he

was made of, and condemned to death. At his execution some one cast it in

his teeth that his country was conquered, to which he replied, 'Then I am

reconciled to death.'

 
Mucianus now gave utterance to an idea which he had long cherished, though

he pretended it was a sudden inspiration. This was that, since by Heaven's

grace the forces of the enemy had been broken, it would ill befit Domitian,

now  that  the  war  was  practically  over,  to  stand  in  the  way  of  the  other

generals to whom the credit belonged. Were the fortunes of the empire or the

safety of Gaul at stake, it would be right that a Caesar should take the field;

the Canninefates and Batavi might be left to minor generals. So Domitian

was to stay at Lugdunum and there show them the power and majesty of the

throne at close quarters. By abstaining from trifling risks he would be ready

to cope with any greater crisis.

 
The ruse was detected, but it could not be unmasked. That was part of the

courtier's policy. Thus they proceeded to Lugdunum. From there Domitian issupposed to have sent messengers to Cerialis to test his loyalty, and to ask

whether the general would transfer his army and his allegiance to him, should

he  present  himself  in  person.  Whether  Domitian's  idea  was  to  plan  war

against his father or to acquire support against his brother, cannot be decided,

for Cerialis parried his proposal with a salutary snub and treated it as a boy's

day-dream. Realizing that older men despised his youth, Domitian gave up

even those functions of government which he had hitherto performed. Aping

bashfulness  and  simple  tastes,  he  hid  his  feelings  under  a  cloak  of

impenetrable reserve, professing literary tastes and a passion for poetry. Thus

he concealed his real self and withdrew from all rivalry with his brother,

whose gentler and altogether different nature he perversely misconstrued.

 THE
HISTORIES:
BOOK YV

 
                                        BOOK V 
                              The Conquest of Judaea

 
Early in this same year Titus Caesar had been entrusted by his father with the

task of completing the reduction of Judaea. While he and his father were both

still private citizens, Titus had distinguished himself as a soldier, and his

reputation  for  efficiency  was  steadily  increasing,  while  the  provinces  and

armies vied with one another in their enthusiasm for him. Wishing to seem

independent of his good fortune, he always showed dignity and energy in the

field.  His  affability  called  forth  devotion.  He  constantly  helped  in  the

trenches  and  could  mingle  with  his  soldiers  on  the  march  without

compromising his dignity as general. Three legions awaited him in Judaea,

the Fifth, Tenth, and Fifteenth, all veterans from his father's army. These

were  reinforced  by  the  Twelfth  from  Syria  and  by  detachments  of  the

Twenty-second and the Third, brought over from Alexandria. This force was

accompanied by twenty auxiliary cohorts and eight regiments of auxiliary

cavalry besides the Kings Agrippa and Sohaemus, King Antiochus' irregulars,

a strong force of Arabs, who had a neighbourly hatred for the Jews, and a

crowd  of  persons  who  had  come  from  Rome  and  the  rest  of  Italy,  each

tempted by the hope of securing the first place in the prince's still unoccupied

affections. With this force Titus entered the enemy's country at the head of

his column, sending out scouts in all directions, and holding himself ready to

fight. He pitched his camp not far from Jerusalem.

 
Since I am coming now to describe the last days of this famous city, it may

not seem out of place to recount here its early history. It is said that the Jews

are refugees from Crete, who settled on the confines of Libya at the time

when Saturn was forcibly deposed by Jupiter. The evidence for this is sought

in the name. Ida is a famous mountain in Crete inhabited by the Idaei, whose

name became lengthened into the foreign form Judaei. Others say that in the

reign of Isis the superfluous population of Egypt, under the leadership of

Hierosolymus  and  Juda,  discharged  itself  upon  the  neighbouring  districts,

while  there  are  many  who  think  the  Jews  an  Ethiopian  stock,  driven  to

migrate by their fear and dislike of King Cepheus. Another tradition makes

them Assyrian refugees, who, lacking lands of their own, occupied a district

of Egypt, and later took to building cities of their own and tilling Hebrew

territory and the frontier-land of Syria. Yet another version assigns to the

Jews an illustrious origin as the descendants of the Solymi—a tribe famous inHomer—who  founded  the  city  and  called  it  Hierosolyma  after  their  own

name.

 
Most authorities agree that a foul and disfiguring disease once broke out in

Egypt, and that King Bocchoris, on approaching the oracle of Ammon and

inquiring for a remedy, was told to purge his kingdom of the plague and to

transport  all  who  suffered  from  it  into  some  other  country,  for  they  had

earned  the  disfavour  of  Heaven.  A  motley  crowd  was  thus  collected  and

abandoned in the desert. While all the other outcasts lay idly lamenting, one

of them, named Moses, advised them not to look for help to gods or men,

since both had deserted them, but to trust rather in themselves and accept as

divine the guidance of the first being by whose aid they should get out of

their  present  plight.  They  agreed,  and  set  out  blindly  to  march  wherever

chance might lead them.

 
Their worst distress came from lack of water. When they were already at

death's door and lying prostrate all over the plain, it so happened that a drove

of wild asses moved away from their pasture to a rock densely covered with

trees.  Guessing  the  truth  from  the  grassy  nature  of  the  ground,  Moses

followed and disclosed an ample flow of water. This saved them. Continuing

their march for six successive days, on the seventh they routed the natives

and gained possession of the country. There they consecrated their city and

their temple.

 
To  ensure  his  future  hold  over  the  people,  Moses  introduced  a  new  cult,

which was the opposite of all other religions. All that we hold sacred they

held profane, and allowed practices which we abominate. They dedicated in a

shrine  an  image  of  the  animal  whose  guidance  had  put  an  end  to  their

wandering and thirst. They killed a ram, apparently as an insult to Ammon,

and also sacrificed a bull, because the Egyptians worship the bull Apis. Pigs

are  subject  to  leprosy;  so  they  abstain  from  pork  in  memory  of  their

misfortune and the foul plague with which they were once infected. Their

frequent fasts bear witness to the long famine they once endured, and, in

token of the corn they carried off, Jewish bread is to this day made without

leaven. They are said to have devoted the seventh day to rest, because that

day brought an end to their troubles. Later, finding idleness alluring, they

gave up the seventh year as well to sloth. Others maintain that they do this in

honour of Saturn; either because their religious principles are derived fromthe Idaei, who are supposed to have been driven out with Saturn and become

the  ancestors  of  the  Jewish  people;  or  else  because,  of  the  seven

constellations which govern the lives of men, the star of Saturn moves in the

topmost orbit and exercises peculiar influence, and also because most of the

heavenly bodies move round their courses in multiples of seven.

 
Whatever  their  origin,  these  rites  are  sanctioned  by  their  antiquity.  Their

other customs are impious and abominable, and owe their prevalence to their

depravity. For all the most worthless rascals, renouncing their national cults,

were always sending money to swell the sum of offerings and tribute. This is

one cause of Jewish prosperity. Another is that they are obstinately loyal to

each other, and always ready to show compassion, whereas they feel nothing

but hatred and enmity for the rest of the world. They eat and sleep separately.

Though immoderate in sexual indulgence, they refrain from all intercourse

with  foreign  women:  among  themselves  anything  is  allowed.  They  have

introduced circumcision to distinguish themselves from other people. Those

who are converted to their customs adopt the same practice, and the first

lessons they learn are to despise the gods, to renounce their country, and to

think nothing of their parents, children, and brethren. However, they take

steps to increase their numbers. They count it a crime to kill any of their later-

born children, and they believe that the souls of those who die in battle or

under persecution are immortal. Thus they think much of having children and

nothing of facing death. They prefer to bury and not burn their dead. In this,

as in their burial rites, and in their belief in an underworld, they conform to

Egyptian custom. Their ideas of heaven are quite different. The Egyptians

worship most of their gods as animals, or in shapes half animal and half

human. The Jews acknowledge one god only, of whom they have a purely

spiritual conception. They think it impious to make images of gods in human

shape  out  of  perishable  materials.  Their  god  is  almighty  and  inimitable,

without beginning and without end. They therefore set up no statues in their

temples, nor even in their cities, refusing this homage both to their own kings

and to the Roman emperors. However, the fact that their priests intoned to the

flute and cymbals and wore wreaths of ivy, and that a golden vine was found

in their temple has led some people to think that they worship Bacchus, who

has  so  enthralled  the  East.  But  their  cult  would  be  most  inappropriate.

Bacchus instituted gay and cheerful rites, but the Jewish ritual is preposterous

and morbid. 
The country of the Jews is bounded by Arabia on the east, by Egypt on the

south, and on the west by Phoenicia and the sea. On the Syrian frontier they

have a distant view towards the north. Physically they are healthy and hardy.

Rain is rare; the soil infertile; its products are of the same kind as ours with

the addition of balsam and palms. The palm is a tall and beautiful tree, the

balsam a mere shrub. When its branches are swollen with sap they open them

with a sharp piece of stone or crockery, for the sap-vessels shrink up at the

touch of iron. The sap is used in medicine. Lebanon, their chief mountain,

stands  always  deep  in  its  eternal  snow,  a  strange  phenomenon  in  such  a

burning climate. Here, too, the river Jordan has its source and comes pouring

down, to find a home in the sea. It flows undiminished through first one lake,

then another, and loses itself in a third. This last is a lake of immense size,

like a sea, though its water has a foul taste and a most unhealthy smell, which

poisons the surrounding inhabitants. No wind can stir waves in it: no fish or

sea-birds can live there. The sluggish water supports whatever is thrown on to

it, as if its surface were solid, while those who cannot swim float on it as

easily as those who can. Every year at the same time the lake yields asphalt.

As with other arts, it is experience which shows how to collect it. It is a black

liquid  which,  when  congealed  with  a  sprinkling  of  vinegar,  floats  on  the

surface of the water. The men who collect it take it in this state into their

hands and haul it on deck. Then without further aid it trickles in and loads the

boat until you cut off the stream. But this you cannot do with iron or brass:

the current is turned by applying blood or a garment stained with a woman's

menstrual discharge. That is what the old authorities say, but those who know

the district aver that floating blocks of asphalt are driven landwards by the

wind and dragged to shore by hand. The steam out of the earth and the heat of

the sun dries them, and they are then split up with axes and wedges, like logs

or blocks of stone.

 
Not far from this lake are the Plains, which they say were once fertile and

covered with large and populous cities which were destroyed by lightning.

Traces of the cities are said to remain, and the ground, which looks scorched,

has  lost  all  power  of  production.  The  plants,  whether  wild  or  artificially

cultivated, are blighted and sterile and wither into dust and ashes, either when

in  leaf  or  flower,  or  when  they  have  attained  their  full  growth.  Without

denying that at some date famous cities were there burnt up by lightning, I

am yet inclined to think that it is the exhalation from the lake which infectsthe  soil  and  poisons  the  surrounding  atmosphere.  Soil  and  climate  being

equally deleterious, the crops and fruits all rot away. The river Belus also

falls into this Jewish sea. Round its mouth is found a peculiar kind of sand

which is mixed with native soda and smelted into glass. Small though the

beach is, its product is inexhaustible.

 
The greater part of the population live in scattered villages, but they also have

towns. Jerusalem is the Jewish capital, and contained the temple, which was

enormously wealthy. A first line of fortifications guarded the city, another the

palace,  and  an  innermost  line  enclosed  the  temple.  None  but  a  Jew  was

allowed as far as the doors: none but the priests might cross the threshold.

When the East was in the hands of the Assyrians, Medes and Persians, they

regarded the Jews as the meanest of their slaves. During the Macedonian

ascendancy King Antiochus endeavoured to abolish their superstitions and to

introduce Greek manners and customs. But Arsaces at that moment rebelled,

and the Parthian war prevented him from effecting any improvement in the

character of this grim people. Then, when Macedon waned, as the Parthian

power was not yet ripe and Rome was still far away, they took kings of their

own. The mob were fickle and drove them out. However, they recovered their

throne by force; banished their countrymen, sacked cities, slew their brothers,

wives, and parents, and committed all the usual kingly crimes. But this only

fostered the hold of the Jewish religion, since the kings had strengthened their

authority by assuming the priesthood.

 
Cnaeus Pompeius was the first Roman to subdue the Jews and set foot in

their temple by right of conquest. It was then first realized that the temple

contained no image of any god: their sanctuary was empty, their mysteries

meaningless. The walls of Jerusalem were destroyed, but the temple was left

standing. Later, during the Roman civil wars, when the eastern provinces had

come under the control of Mark Antony, the Parthian Prince Pacorus seized

Judaea, and was killed by Publius Ventidius. The Parthians were driven back

over the Euphrates, and Caius Sosius subdued the Jews. Antony gave the

kingdom to Herod, and Augustus, after his victory, enlarged it. After Herod's

death,  somebody  called  Simon,  without  awaiting  the  emperor's  decision,

forcibly assumed the title of king. He was executed by Quintilius Varus, who

was Governor of Syria; the Jews were repressed and the kingdom divided

between three of Herod's sons. Under Tiberius all was quiet. Caligula ordered

them  to  put  up  his  statue  in  the  temple.  They  preferred  war  to  that.  ButCaligula's death put an end to the rising. In Claudius' reign the kings had all

either died or lost most of their territory. The emperor therefore made Judaea

a province to be governed by Roman knights or freedmen. One of these,

Antonius Felix, indulged in every kind of cruelty and immorality, wielding a

king's authority with all the instincts of a slave. He had married Drusilla, a

granddaughter of Antony and Cleopatra, so that he was Antony's grandson-

in-law, while Claudius was Antony's grandson.

 
The Jews endured such oppression patiently until the time of Gessius Florus,

under whom war broke out. Cestius Gallus, the Governor of Syria, tried to

crush it, but met with more reverses than victories. He died, either in the

natural course or perhaps of disgust, and Nero sent out Vespasian, who, in a

couple  of  campaigns,  thanks  to  his  reputation,  good  fortune,  and  able

subordinates, had the whole of the country districts and all the towns except

Jerusalem under the heel of his victorious army. The next year was taken up

with civil war, and passed quietly enough as far as the Jews were concerned.

But peace once restored in Italy, foreign troubles began again with feelings

embittered on our side by the thought that the Jews were the only people who

had not given in. At the same time it seemed best to leave Titus at the head of

the army to meet the eventualities of the new reign, whether good or bad.

 
Thus, as we have already seen, Titus pitched his camp before the walls of

Jerusalem  and  proceeded  to  display  his  legions  in  battle  order.  The  Jews

formed up at the foot of their own walls, ready, if successful, to venture

further, but assured of their retreat in case of reverse. A body of cavalry and

some  light-armed  foot  were  sent  forward,  and  fought  an  indecisive

engagement, from which the enemy eventually retired. During the next few

days  a  series  of  skirmishes  took  place  in  front  of  the  gates,  and  at  last

continual  losses  drove  the  Jews  behind  their  walls.  The  Romans  then

determined to take it by storm. It seemed undignified to sit and wait for the

enemy to starve, and the men all clamoured for the risks, some being really

brave, while many others were wild and greedy for plunder. Titus himself

had the vision of Rome with all her wealth and pleasures before his eyes, and

felt that their enjoyment was postponed unless Jerusalem fell at once. The

city,  however,  stands  high  and  is  fortified  with  works  strong  enough  to

protect a city standing on the plain. Two enormous hills were surrounded by

walls ingeniously built so as to project or slope inwards and thus leave the

flanks of an attacking party exposed to fire. The rocks were jagged at the top.The towers, where the rising ground helped, were sixty feet high, and in the

hollows as much as a hundred and twenty. They are a wonderful sight and

seem from a distance to be all of equal height. Within this runs another line

of fortification surrounding the palace, and on a conspicuous height stands

the Antonia, a castle named by Herod in honour of Mark Antony.

 
The temple was built like a citadel with walls of its own, on which more care

and  labour  had  been  spent  than  on  any  of  the  others.  Even  the  cloisters

surrounding the temple formed a splendid rampart. There was a never-failing

spring of water, catacombs hollowed out of the hills, and pools or cisterns for

holding the rain-water. Its original builders had foreseen that the peculiarities

of  Jewish  life  would  lead  to  frequent  wars,  consequently  everything  was

ready for the longest of sieges. Besides this, when Pompey took the city,

bitter experience taught them several lessons, and in the days of Claudius

they had taken advantage of his avarice to buy rights of fortification, and

built walls in peace-time as though war were imminent. Their numbers were

now swelled by floods of human refuse and unfortunate refugees from other

towns.  All  the  most  desperate  characters  in  the  country  had  taken  refuge

there, which did not conduce to unity. They had three armies, each with its

own general. The outermost and largest line of wall was held by Simon; the

central  city  by  John,  and  the  temple  by  Eleazar.  John  and  Simon  were

stronger than Eleazar in numbers and equipment, but he had the advantage of

a strong position. Their relations mainly consisted of fighting, treachery, and

arson:  a  large  quantity  of  corn  was  burnt.  Eventually,  under  pretext  of

offering a sacrifice, John sent a party of men to massacre Eleazar and his

troops, and by this means gained possession of the temple. Thus Jerusalem

was divided into two hostile parties, but on the approach of the Romans the

necessities of foreign warfare reconciled their differences.

 
Various portents had occurred at this time, but so sunk in superstition are the

Jews and so opposed to all religious practices that they think it wicked to

avert the threatened evil by sacrifices or vows. Embattled armies were seen to

meet in the sky with flashing arms, and the temple shone with sudden fire

from heaven. The doors of the shrine suddenly opened, a supernatural voice

was heard calling the gods out, and at once there began a mighty movement

of departure. Few took alarm at all this. Most people held the belief that,

according to the ancient priestly writings, this was the moment at which the

East  was  fated  to  prevail:  they  would  now  start  forth  from  Judaea  andconquer the world. This enigmatic prophecy really applied to Vespasian and

Titus. But men are blinded by their hopes. The Jews took to themselves the

promised destiny, and even defeat could not convince them of the truth. The

number of the besieged, men and women of every age, is stated to have

reached six hundred thousand. There were arms for all who could carry them,

and far more were ready to fight than would be expected from their total

numbers. The women were as determined as the men: if they were forced to

leave their homes they had more to fear in life than in death.

 
Such was the city and such the people with which Titus was faced. As the

nature  of  the  ground  forbade  a  sudden  assault,  he  determined  to  employ

siege-works  and  penthouse  shelters.  The  work  was  accordingly  divided

among the legions, and there was a truce to fighting until they had got ready

every means of storming a town that had ever been devised by experience or

inventive ingenuity.

 
 

 
                          The End of the German Revolt

 
 

 
After the severe reverse at Trier Civilis recruited his army in Germany, and

pitched his camp near Vetera. The position was a safe one, and he hoped to

inspirit his native troops with the memory of their former victories there.

Cerialis followed in his footsteps, with forces now doubled by the arrival of

the Second, Thirteenth, and Fourteenth legions, besides auxiliary troops, both

horse and foot, who had long received their summons and came hurrying on

the news of victory. Neither general was dilatory, but a vast plain lay between

them. It was by nature swampy, and Civilis had built a dam projecting into

the Rhine, which stemmed the current and flooded the adjacent fields. The

treacherous nature of the ground, where the shallows were hard to find, told

against  our  men,  who  were  heavily  armed  and  afraid  of  swimming.  The

Germans,  on  the  other  hand,  were  used  to  rivers,  lightly  armed,  and  tall

enough to keep their heads above water.

 
Provoked by the Batavi, the bravest of our troops opened the engagement at

once, but soon fell into a panic when their arms and horses began to sink in

the deep marshes. The Germans, who knew the fords, came leaping acrossthem, often leaving our front alone and running round to the flanks or the

rear. It was not like an infantry engagement at close quarters, but more like a

naval battle. The men floundered about in the water or, finding firm foothold,

strove with all their might for possession of it. Thus, wounded and whole,

those who could swim and those who could not, struggled helplessly with

each other and perished all alike. However, considering the confusion, our

loss was less than might have been expected, for the Germans, not daring to

venture  out  of  the  marsh,  withdrew  to  their  camp.  The  result  of  this

engagement gave each of the generals a different motive for hastening on a

decisive battle. Civilis wanted to follow up his success, Cerialis to wipe out

his  disgrace.  Success  stimulated  the  pride  of  the  Germans;  the  Romans

thrilled with shame. The natives spent the night singing uproariously, while

our men muttered angry threats.

 
At daybreak Cerialis formed up his cavalry and the auxiliary cohorts on his

front, with the legions behind them, while he himself held a picked body in

reserve for emergencies. Civilis did not deploy his line, but halted them in

columns, with the Batavi and Cugerni on his right, and the forces from across

the Rhine near the river on the left. Neither general followed the usual custom

of haranguing the whole army. They rode along and addressed their various

divisions in turn. Cerialis spoke of the ancient glory of the Roman name and

of all their victories old and new. He urged them 'to blot out for ever their

treacherous and cowardly enemy whom they had already beaten. They had to

punish not to fight them. They had just fought against superior numbers and

had yet routed the Germans, and, moreover, the pick of their troops. This

remnant had their hearts full of panic and all their wounds behind them.' He

then  gave  special  encouragement  to  each  of  the  legions,  calling  the

Fourteenth the conquerors of Britain, reminding the Sixth that the influence

of their example had set Galba on the throne, and telling the Second that in

the coming fight they would for the first time dedicate their new colours and

their new eagle to Rome's service. Then riding along to the German army, he

pointed with his hand and bade them recover their own river-bank and their

own camp at the enemy's expense. They all cheered with hearts the lighter for

his words. Some longed for battle after a long spell of quiet: others were

weary of war and pined for peace, hoping that the future would bring them

rest and recompense.

 
Nor was there silence in Civilis' lines. As he formed them up he appealed tothe  spot  as  evidence  of  their  valour.  The  Germans  and  Batavians  were

standing,  he  told  them,  'on  the  field  of  their  glory,  trampling  the  charred

bones of Roman soldiers under foot. Wherever the Romans turned their eyes

they saw nothing but menacing reminders of surrender and defeat. They must

not be alarmed by that sudden change of fortune in the battle at Trier. It was

their own victory which hampered the Germans there: they had dropped their

weapons and filled their hands with loot. Since then everything had gone in

their favour and against the Romans. He had taken every possible precaution,

as  befitted  a  cunning  general.  They  themselves  were  familiar  with  these

soaking plains, but the swamps would be a deadly trap for the enemy. They

had the Rhine and the gods of Germany before their eyes, and in the might of

these they must go to battle, remembering their wives and parents and their

fatherland. This day would either gild the glory of their ancestors or earn the

execration of posterity.' They applauded his words according to their custom

by dancing and clashing their arms, and then opened the battle with showers

of stones and leaden balls and other missiles, trying to lure on our men, who

had not yet entered the marsh.

 
Their  missiles  exhausted,  the  enemy  warmed  to  their  work  and  made  an

angry charge. Thanks to their great height and their very long spears they

could  thrust  from  some  distance  at  our  men,  who  were  floundering  and

slipping about in the marsh. While this went on, a column of Batavi swam

across from the dam which, as we described above, had been built out into

the Rhine. This started a panic and the line of our auxiliaries began to be

driven back. Then the legions took up the fight and equalized matters by

staying the enemy's wild charge. Meanwhile a Batavian deserter approached

Cerialis, avowing that he could take the enemy in the rear if the cavalry were

sent  round  the  edge  of  the  swamp:  the  ground  was  solid  there,  and  the

Cugerni,  whose  task  it  was  to  keep  watch,  were  off  their  guard.  Two

squadrons of horse were sent with the deserter, and succeeded in outflanking

the unsuspecting enemy. The legions in front, when the din told them what

had happened, redoubled their efforts. The Germans were beaten and fled to

the Rhine. This day might have brought the war to an end, had the Roman

fleet arrived in time. As it was, even the cavalry were prevented from pursuit

by a sudden downpour of rain shortly before nightfall.

 
On the next day the Fourteenth legion were sent to join Annius Gallus in

Upper Germany, and their place in Cerialis' army was filled by the Tenthfrom Spain. Civilis was reinforced by the Chauci. Feeling that he was not

strong enough to hold the Batavian capital, he took whatever was portable

with him, burnt everything else, and retired into the island. He knew that the

Romans had not enough ships to build a bridge, and that they had no other

means  of  getting  across.  He  also  destroyed  the  mole  built  by  Drusus

Germanicus. As the bed of the Rhine here falls towards Gaul, his removal of

all obstacles gave it free course; the river was practically diverted, and the

channel between the Germans and the island became so small and dry as to

form no barrier between them. Tutor and Classicus also crossed the Rhine,

together  with  a  hundred  and  thirteen  town-councillors  from  Trier,  among

whom was Alpinius Montanus, who, as we have already seen, had been sent

by  Antonius  Primus  into  Gaul.  He  was  accompanied  by  his  brother.  By

arousing sympathy and by offering presents, the others, too, were all busy

raising reinforcements among these eagerly adventurous tribes.

 
The war was far from being over. Dividing his forces, Civilis suddenly made

a simultaneous attack on all four Roman garrisons—the Tenth at Arenacum,

the Second at Batavodurum, and the auxiliary horse and foot at Grinnes and

at Vada. Civilis himself, Verax his nephew, Classicus and Tutor each led one

of  the  attacking  parties.  They  could  not  hope  all  to  be  successful,  but

reckoned that, if they made several ventures, fortune would probably favour

one  or  the  other.  Besides,  Cerialis,  they  supposed,  was  off  his  guard;  on

receiving news from several places at once he would hurry from one garrison

to another, and might be cut off on his way. The party told off against the

Tenth considered it no light task to storm a legion, so they fell on the soldiers,

who had come outside to cut timber, and killed the camp-prefect, five senior

centurions, and a handful of the men. The rest defended themselves in the

trenches.  Meanwhile  another  party  of  Germans  endeavoured  to  break  the

bridge which had been begun at Batavodurum, but nightfall put an end to the

battle before it was won.

 
The attack on Grinnes and Vada proved more formidable. Civilis led the

assault on Vada, Classicus on Grinnes. Nothing could stop them. The bravest

of the defenders had fallen, among them, commanding a cavalry squadron,

Briganticus, whom we have seen already, as a faithful ally of Rome and a

bitter enemy of his uncle Civilis. However, when Cerialis came to the rescue

with a picked troop of horse, the tables were turned, and the Germans were

driven headlong into the river. While Civilis was trying to stop the rout hewas recognized, and finding himself a target, he left his horse and swam

across the river. Verax escaped in the same way, while some boats put in to

fetch Tutor and Classicus.

 
Even  now  the  Roman  fleet  had  not  joined  the  army.  They  had,  indeed,

received orders, but fear held them back, and the rowers were employed on

various duties elsewhere. It must be admitted, also, that Cerialis did not give

them time enough to carry out his orders. He was a man of sudden resolves

and brilliant successes. Even when his strategy had failed, good luck always

came to his rescue. Thus neither he nor his army cared much about discipline.

A few days later, again, he narrowly escaped being taken prisoner and did not

escape disgrace.

 
He had gone to Novaesium and Bonn to inspect the winter quarters that were

being built for his legions, and was returning with the fleet. The Germans

noticed that his escort straggled, and that watch was carelessly kept at night.

So they planned a surprise. Choosing a night black with clouds they slipped

down stream and made their way unmolested into the camp. For the first

onslaught  they  called  cunning  to  their  aid.  They  cut  the  tent-ropes  and

slaughtered the soldiers as they struggled under their own canvas. Another

party fell on the ships, threw hawsers aboard, and towed them off. Having

surprised the camp in dead silence, when once the carnage began they added

to the panic by making the whole place ring with shouts. Awakened by their

wounds the Romans hunted for weapons and rushed along the streets, some

few in uniform, most of them with their clothes wrapped round their arms

and  a  drawn  sword  in  their  hand.  The  general,  who  was  half-asleep  and

almost naked, was only saved by the enemy's mistake. His flag-ship being

easily distinguishable, they carried it off, thinking he was there. But Cerialis

had been spending the night elsewhere; as most people believed, carrying on

an  intrigue  with  a  Ubian  woman  named  Claudia  Sacrata.  The  sentries

sheltered their guilt under the general's disgrace, pretending that they had

orders to keep quiet and not disturb him: so they had dispensed with the

bugle-call and the challenge on rounds, and dropped off to sleep themselves.

In full daylight the enemy sailed off with their captive vessels and towed the

flag-ship up the Lippe as an offering to Veleda.

 
Civilis was now seized with a desire to make a naval display. He manned all

the available biremes and all the ships with single banks of oars, and added tothis fleet an immense number of small craft. These carry thirty or forty men

apiece and are rigged like Illyrian cruisers. The small craft he had captured

were worked with bright, parti-coloured plaids, which served as sails and

made a fine show. He chose for review the miniature sea of water where the

Rhine comes pouring down to the ocean through the mouth of the Maas. His

reason  for  the  demonstration—apart  from  Batavian  vanity—was  to  scare

away  the  provision-convoys  that  were  already  on  their  way  from  Gaul.

Cerialis, who was less alarmed than astonished, at once formed up a fleet.

Though  inferior  in  numbers,  he  had  the  advantage  of  larger  ships,

experienced rowers, and clever pilots. The Romans had the stream with them,

the Germans the wind. So they sailed past each other, and after trying a few

shots with light missiles they parted. Civilis without more ado retired across

the  Rhine.  Cerialis  vigorously  laid  waste  the  island  of  the  Batavi,  and

employed  the  common  device  of  leaving  Civilis's  houses  and  fields

untouched. They were now well into autumn. The heavy equinoctial rains had

set the river in flood and thus turned the marshy, low-lying island into a sort

of lake. Neither fleet nor provision-convoys had arrived, and their camp on

the flat plain began to be washed away by the force of the current.

 
Civilis afterwards claimed that at this point the Germans could have crushed

the Roman legions and wanted to do so, but that he had cunningly dissuaded

them. Nor does this seem far from true, since his surrender followed in a few

days'  time.  Cerialis  had  been  sending  secret  messages,  promising  the

Batavians  peace  and  Civilis  pardon,  urging  Veleda  and  her  relatives  to

change the fortune of a war that had only brought disaster after disaster, by

doing a timely service to Rome. 'The Treviri,' he reminded them, 'had been

slaughtered; the allegiance of the Ubii recovered; the Batavians robbed of

their home. By supporting Civilis they had gained nothing but bloodshed,

banishment, and bereavement. He was a fugitive exile, a burden to those who

harboured him. Besides, they had earned blame enough by crossing the Rhine

so often: if they took any further steps,—from the one side they might expect

insult and injury, from the other vengeance and the wrath of heaven.'

 
Thus Cerialis mingled threats and promises. The loyalty of the tribes across

the Rhine was shaken, and murmurs began to make themselves heard among

the  Batavi.  'How  much  further  is  our  ruin  to  go?'  they  asked.  'One  tribe

cannot free the whole world from the yoke. What good have we done by

slaughtering and burning Roman legions except to bring out others, largerand stronger? If it was to help Vespasian that we have fought so vigorously,

Vespasian  is  master  of  the  world.  If  we  are  challenging  Rome—what  an

infinitesimal  fraction  of  the  human  race  we  Batavians  are!  We  must

remember what burdens Raetia and Noricum and all Rome's other allies bear.

From us they levy no tribute, only our manhood and our men. That is next

door to freedom. And, after all, if we have to choose our masters, it is less

disgrace to put up with Roman emperors than with German priestesses.' Thus

the  common  people:  the  chieftains  used  more  violent  language.  'It  was

Civilis' lunacy that had driven them to war. He wanted to remedy his private

troubles  by  ruining  his  country.  The  Batavians  had  incurred  the  wrath  of

heaven  by  blockading  Roman  legions,  murdering  Roman  officers,  and

plunging into a war which was useful for one of them and deadly for the rest.

Now they had reached the limit, unless they came to their senses and openly

showed their repentance by punishing the culprit.'

 
Civilis was well aware of their changed feelings and determined to forestall

them. He was tired of hardship, and he felt, besides, that desire to live which

so  often  weakens  the  resolution  of  the  bravest  spirits.  He  demanded  an

interview. The bridge over the river Nabalia was broken down in the middle,

and  the  two  generals  advanced  on  to  the  broken  ends.  Civilis  began  as

follows: 'If I were defending myself before one of Vitellius' officers, I could

expect neither pardon for my conduct nor credence for my words. Between

him  and  me  there  has  been  nothing  but  hatred.  He  began  the  quarrel,  I

fostered it. Towards Vespasian I have from the beginning shown respect.

When he was a private citizen, we were known as friends. Antonius Primus

was aware of this when he wrote urging me to take up arms to prevent the

legions  from  Germany  and  the  Gallic  levies  from  crossing  the  Alps.  The

instructions which Antonius gave in his letter Hordeonius Flaccus ratified by

word of mouth. I raised the standard in Germania, as did Mucianus in Syria,

Aponius in Moesia, Flavianus in Pannonia....'

 
[The rest is lost.]

  
THE FIRST SIX BOOKS OF THE ANNALS OF TACITUS: BEING              AN HISTORY OF THE EMPEROR TIBERIUS

 
                          THE ANNALS OF TACITUS

 
                                        BOOK I

 
                                  A.D. 14 AND 15.

 
Kings were the original Magistrates of Rome: Lucius Brutus founded Liberty

and the Consulship: Dictators were chosen occasionally, and used only in

pressing exigencies. Little more than two years prevailed the supreme power

of the Decemvirate, and the consular jurisdiction of the military Tribunes not

very many. The domination of Cinna was but short, that of Sylla not long.

The authority of Pompey and Crassus was quickly swallowed up in Caesar;

that of Lepidus and Anthony in Augustus. The Commonwealth, then long

distressed and exhausted by the rage of her civil dissensions, fell easily into

his hands, and over her he assumed a sovereign dominion; yet softened with a

venerable  name,  that  of  Prince  or  Chief  of  the  Senate.  But  the  several

revolutions in the ancient free state of Rome, and all her happy or disastrous

events, are already recorded by writers of signal renown. Nor even in the

reign of Augustus were there wanting authors of distinction and genius to

have composed his story; till by the prevailing spirit of fear, flattery, and

abasement  they  were  checked.  As  to  the  succeeding  Princes,  Tiberius,

Caligula,  Claudius,  and  Nero;  the  dread  of  their  tyranny,  whilst  they  yet

reigned, falsified their history; and after their fall, the fresh detestation of

their cruelties inflamed their Historians. Hence my own design of recounting

briefly certain incidents in the reign of Augustus, chiefly towards his latter

end, and of entering afterwards more fully into that of Tiberius and the other

three;  unbiassed  as  I  am  in  this  undertaking  by  any  resentment,  or  any

affection; all the influences of these personal passions being far from me.

 
When, after the fall of Brutus and Cassius, there remained none to fight for

the Commonwealth, and her arms were no longer in her own hands; when

Sextus  Pompeius  was  utterly  defeated  in  Sicily,  Lepidus  bereft  of  his

command. Marc Anthony slain; and of all the chiefs of the late Dictator's

party, only Octavius his nephew was left; he put off the invidious name of

Triumvir, and styling himself Consul, pretended that the jurisdiction attached

to the Tribuneship was his highest aim, as in it the protection of the populace

was his only view: but when once he had laid his foundations wider, securedthe  soldiery  by  liberality  and  donations,  gained  the  people  by  store  of

provisions, and charmed all by the blessings and sweetness of public peace,

he began by politic gradations to exalt himself, to extend his domination, and

with his own power to consolidate the authority of the Senate, jurisdiction of

the Magistrate, and weight and force of the Laws; usurpations in which he

was thwarted by no man: all the bravest Republicans and his most daring foes

were slain in battle, or gleaned up by the late sanguinary proscriptions; and

for the surviving Nobility, they were covered with wealth, and distinguished

with  public  honours,  according  to  the  measure  of  their  debasement,  and

promptness to bondage. Add, that all the creatures of this new Power, who in

the loss of public freedom had gained private fortunes, preferred a servile

condition, safe and possessed, to the revival of ancient liberty with personal

peril.  Neither  were  the  Provinces  averse  to  the  present  Revolution,  and

Sovereignty of one; since under that of the people and Senate they had lived

in constant fear and mistrust, sorely rent and harassed as they were by the

raging competition amongst our Grandees, as well as by the grievous rapine

and exactions of our Magistrates; in vain too, under these their oppressions,

had  been  their  appeal  to  the  protection  of  the  laws,  which  were  utterly

enfeebled and borne down by might and violence, by faction and parties; nay,

even by subornation and money.

 
Moreover,  Augustus,  in  order  to  fortify  his  domination  with  collateral

bulwarks, raised his sister's son Claudius Marcellus, a perfect youth, to the

dignity  of  Pontiff  and  that  of  Aedile;  preferred  Marcus  Agrippa  to  two

successive Consulships, a man in truth meanly born but an accomplished

soldier, and the companion of his victories; and Marcellus, the husband of

Julia, soon after dying, chose him for his son-in-law. Even the sons of his

wife, Tiberius Nero, and Claudius Drusus, he dignified with high military

titles and commands; though his house was yet supported by descendants of

his own blood. For into the Julian family and name of the Caesars he had

already adopted Lucius and Caius, the sons of Agrippa; and though they were

but children, neither of them seventeen years old, vehement had been his

ambition  to  see  them  declared  Princes  of  the  Roman  Youth  and  even

designed to the Consulship; while openly, he was protesting against admitting

these early honours. Presently, upon the decease of Agrippa, were these his

children snatched away, either by their own natural but hasty fate, or by the

deadly fraud of their step-mother Livia; Lucius on his journey to commandthe armies in Spain; Caius in his return from Armenia, ill of a wound: and as

Drusus, one of her own sons, had been long since dead, Tiberius remained

sole  candidate  for  the  succession.  Upon  this  object,  centred  all  princely

honours; he was by Augustus adopted for his son, assumed Colleague in the

Empire, partner in the jurisdiction tribunitial, and presented under all these

dignities to the several armies: instances of grandeur which were no longer

derived from the secret schemes and plottings of his mother, as in times past,

while  her  husband  had  unexceptionable  heirs  of  his  own,  but  thenceforth

bestowed at her open suit. For as Augustus was now very aged, she had over

him obtained such absolute sway, that for her pleasure he banished into the

Isle of Planasia his only surviving grandson, Agrippa Postumus; one, in truth,

destitute of laudable accomplishments, in his temper untractable, and stupidly

conceited  of  his  mighty  strength,  but  branded  with  no  misdemeanour  or

transgression. The Emperor had withal set Germanicus, the son of Drusus,

over eight legions quartered upon the Rhine, and obliged Tiberius to adopt

him, though Tiberius had then a son of his own, one of competent years; but

it was the study of Augustus, to secure himself and the succession by variety

of stays and engraftments. War at that time there was none, except that in

Germany, kept on foot rather to abolish the disgrace sustained by Quinctilius

Varus,  there  slain  with  his  army,  than  from  any  ambition  to  enlarge  the

Empire, or for any other valuable advantage. In profound tranquillity were

affairs at Rome. To the Magistrates remained their wonted names; of the

Romans the younger sort had been born since the battle of Actium, and even

most of the old during the civil wars: how few were then living who had seen

the ancient free State!

 
The frame and economy of Rome being thus totally overturned, amongst the

Romans  were  no  longer  found  any  traces  of  their  primitive  spirit,  or

attachment to the virtuous institutions of antiquity. But as the equality of the

whole  was  extinguished  by  the  sovereignty  of  one,  all  men  regarded  the

orders of the Prince as the only rule of conduct and obedience; nor felt they

any anxiety, while Augustus yet retained vigour of life, and upheld the credit

of his administration with public peace, and the imperial fortune of his house.

But when he became broken with the pressure of age and infirmities; when

his  end  was  at  hand,  and  thence  a  new  source  of  hopes  and  views  was

presented, some few there were who began to reason idly about the blessings

and recovery of Liberty; many dreaded a civil war, others longed for one;while far the greater part were uttering their several apprehensions of their

future masters; "that naturally stern and savage was the temper of Agrippa,

and  by  his  public  contumely  enraged  into  fury;  and  neither  in  age  nor

experience was he equal to the weight of Empire. Tiberius indeed had arrived

at  fulness  of  years,  and  was  a  distinguished  captain,  but  possessed  the

inveterate pride entailed upon the Claudian race; and many indications of a

cruel nature escaped him, in spite of all his arts to disguise it; besides that

from his early infancy he was trained up in a reigning house, and even in his

youth  inured  to  an  accumulation  of  power  and  honours,  consulships  and

triumphs: nor during the several years of his abode at Rhodes, where, under

the  plausible  name  of  retirement,  a  real  banishment  was  covered,  did  he

exercise other occupation than that of meditating future vengeance, studying

the arts of treachery, and practising secret, abominable sensualities: add to

these  considerations,  that  of  his  mother,  a  woman  inspired  with  all  the

tyranny of her sex; yes, the Romans must be under bondage to a woman, and

moreover enthralled by two youths, who would first combine to oppress the

State, and then falling into dissension, rend it piecemeal."

 
While the public was engaged in these and the like debates, the illness of

Augustus  waxed  daily  more  grievous;  and  some  strongly  suspected  the

pestilent practices of his wife. For there had been, some months before, a

rumour abroad, that Augustus having singled out a few of his most faithful

servants, and taken Fabius Maximus for his only companion, had, with no

other retinue, sailed secretly over to the Island of Planasia, there to visit his

Grandson Agrippa; that many tears were shed on both sides, many tokens of

mutual tenderness shown, and hopes from thence conceived, that the unhappy

youth would be restored to his own place in his Grandfather's family. That

Maximus had disclosed it to Martia, she to Livia; and thence the Emperor

knew that the secret was betrayed: that Maximus being soon after dead (dead,

as it was doubted, through fear, by his own hands), Martia was observed, in

her lamentations and groans at his funeral, to accuse herself as the sad cause

of her husband's destruction. Whatever truth was in all this, Tiberius was

scarce entered Illyrium, but he was hastily recalled by his mother's letters: nor

is  it  fully  known  whether  at  his  return  to  Nola,  he  found  Augustus  yet

breathing, or already breathless. For Livia had carefully beset the palace, and

all the avenues to it, with detachments of the guards; and good news of his

recovery were from time to time given out. When she had taken all measuresnecessary  in  so  great  a  conjuncture,  in  one  and  the  same  moment  was

published the departure of Augustus, and the accession of Tiberius.

 
The  first  feat  of  this  new  reign  was  the  murder  of  young  Agrippa:  the

assassin, a bold and determined Centurion, found him destitute of arms, and

little apprehending such a destiny, yet was scarce able to despatch him. Of

this transaction Tiberius avoided any mention in the Senate: he would have it

pass for done by the commands of Augustus; as if he had transmitted written

orders to the Tribune, who guarded Agrippa, "to slay him the instant he heard

of his grandfather's decease." It is very true that Augustus had made many

and  vehement  complaints  of  the  young  man's  obstinate  and  unruly

demeanour,  and  even  solicited  from  the  Senate  a  decree  to  authorise  his

banishment: but he never hardened himself against the sentiments of nature,

nor in any instance dipped his hands in his own blood; neither is it credible

that he would barbarously sacrifice the life of his grandson for the security

and establishment of his step-son. More probable it is, that this hasty murder

was purely the work of Tiberius and Livia; that the young Prince, hated and

dreaded by both, fell thus untimely, to rid the one of his apprehensions and a

rival, and to satiate in the other the rancorous spirit of a step-mother. When

the  Centurion,  according  to  the  custom  of  the  army,  acquainted  Tiberius,

"that his commands were executed;" he answered, "he had commanded no

such execution, and the Centurion must appear before the Senate, and for it

be answerable to them." This alarmed Sallustius Crispus, who shared in all

his secret counsels, and had sent the Centurion the warrant: he dreaded that

he should be arraigned for the assassination, and knew it equally perilous

either to confess the truth, and charge the Emperor; or falsely to clear the

Emperor, and accuse himself. Hence he had recourse to Livia, and warned

her, "never to divulge the secrets of the palace, never to expose to public

examination  the  ministers  who  advised,  nor  the  soldiers  who  executed:

Tiberius should beware of relaxing the authority of the Prince, by referring all

things to that of the Senate; since it was the indispensable prerogative of

sovereignty for all men to be accountable only to one."

 
Now at Rome, Consuls, Senators, and Roman Knights, were all rushing with

emulation into bondage, and the higher the quality of each the more false and

forward the men; all careful so to frame their faces, as to reconcile false joy

for the accession of Tiberius, with feigned sadness for the loss of Augustus:

hence they intermingled fears with gladness, wailings with gratulations, andall with servile flattery. Sextus Pompeius and Sextus Apuleius, at that time

Consuls, took first the oath of fidelity to Tiberius; then administered it to

Seius  Strabo  and  Caius  Turranius;  the  former  Captain  of  the  Praetorian

Guards, the other Intendant of the Public Stores. The oath was next given to

the Senate, to the people, and to the soldiery: all by the same Consuls; for

Tiberius affected to derive all public transactions from the legal ministry of

the  Consuls,  as  if  the  ancient  Republic  still  subsisted,  and  he  were  yet

unresolved about embracing the sovereign rule: he even owned in his edict

for summoning the Senate, that he issued it by virtue of the Tribunitial power,

granted him under Augustus. The edict, too, was short and unexceptionably

modest. It imported that, "they were to consider of the funeral honours proper

to be paid his deceased Father: for himself he would not depart from the

corpse; and further than this edict implied, he claimed no share in the public

administration." Yet from the moment Augustus was dead, he usurped all the

prerogatives of imperial state, gave the word to the Praetorian Cohorts; had

soldiers about the palace, guards about his person, went guarded in the street,

guarded to the Senate, and bore all the marks of Majesty: nay, he writ letters

to the several armies in the undisguised style of one already their Prince: nor

did he ever hesitate in expression, or speak with perplexity, but when he

spoke to the Senate. The chief cause of his obscurity there proceeded from

his fear of Germanicus: he dreaded that he, who was master of so many

legions, of numberless auxiliaries, and of all the allies of Rome; he, who was

the darling of the people, might wish rather to possess the Empire, than to

wait for it; he likewise, in this mysterious way of dealing with the Senate,

sought false glory, and would rather seem by the Commonwealth chosen and

called to the Empire, than to have crept darkly into it by the intrigues of a

woman, or by adoption from a superannuated Prince. It was also afterwards

found,  that  by  this  abstruseness  and  counterfeit  irresolution  he  meant  to

penetrate into the designs and inclinations of the great men: for his jealous

spirit construed all their words, all their looks, into crimes; and stored them

up in his heart against a day of vengeance.

 
When  he  first  met  the  Senate,  he  would  bear  no  other  business  to  be

transacted but that about the funeral of Augustus. His last will was brought in

by the Vestal Virgins: in it Tiberius and Livia were appointed his heirs, Livia

adopted into the Julian family, and dignified with the name of Augusta: into

the next and second degree of heirship he adopted his grandchildren and theirchildren; and in the third degree he named the great men of Rome, most of

them  hated  by  him,  but  out  of  vainglory  he  named  them,  and  for  future

renown. His legacies were not beyond the usual bounds; only he left to the

Roman  people  four  hundred  thousand  great  sesterces,  to  the  populace  or

common  sort,  thirty-  five  thousand;  to  every  common  soldier  of  the

Praetorian Guards, a thousand small sesterces, and to every soldier of the

Roman legions three hundred. The funeral honours were next considered.

The  chief  proposed  were  these:  Asinius  Gallus  moved  that  "the  funeral

should pass through the Triumphal Gate:" Lucius Arruntius, "that the titles of

all the laws which he had made, and the names of all the nations which he

had conquered, should be carried before the corpse:" Valerius Messala added,

that "the oath of allegiance to Tiberius should be renewed every year;" and

being  asked  by  Tiberius,  "whether  at  his  instigation  he  had  made  that

motion?"  "I  spoke  it  as  my  opinion,"  says  Messala;  "nor  will  I  ever  be

determined by any but my own, in things which concern the commonweal; let

who will be provoked by my freedom." Only this new turn was wanting to

complete the prevailing flattery of the time. The Senators then concurred in a

loud cry, "that upon their own shoulders they must bear the body to the pile."

But  Tiberius  declined  the  offer  from  an  arrogant  show  of  moderation.

Moreover, he cautioned the people by an edict, "not to disturb the funeral

functions with a zeal over-passionate, as they had those of Julius Caesar; nor

to insist that the corpse of Augustus should be burnt rather in the Forum, than

in the field of Mars, which was the place appointed." On the funeral day the

soldiers under arms kept guard; a mighty mockery this to those who had

either seen, or heard their fathers describe, the day when Caesar the Dictator

was slain: servitude was then new, its sorrows yet fresh and bitter; and liberty

unsuccessfully retrieved by a deed which, while it seemed impious to some,

was thought altogether glorious by others, and hence tore Rome into tumults

and the violence of parties: they who knew that turbulent day, and compared

it with the quiet exit of Augustus, ridiculed the foppery of "calling an aid of

soldiers to secure a peaceable burial to a Prince who had grown old in peace

and power, and even provided against a relapse into liberty, by a long train of

successors."

 
Hence  much  and  various  matter  of  observation  concerning  Augustus:  the

superstitious multitude admired the fortuitous events of his fortune; "that the

last day of his life, and the first of his reign, was the same; that he died atNola, in the same village, and in the same house, and in the same chamber,

where  his  father  Octavius  died.  They  observed  to  his  glory,  his  many

Consulships, equal in number to those of Valerius Corvinus and of Caius

Marius, joined together; that he had exercised the power of the Tribuneship

seven-and-thirty  continued  years:  that  he  was  one-and-  twenty  times

proclaimed Imperator; with many other numerous honours repeated to him,

or created for him." Men of deeper discernment entered further into his life,

but differed about it. His admirers said, "that his filial piety to his father

Caesar,  and  the  distractions  of  the  Republic,  where  the  laws  no  longer

governed, had driven him into a civil war; which, whatever be the first cause,

can never be begun or carried, on by just and gentle means." Indeed, to be

revenged on the murderers of his father, he had made many great sacrifices to

the  violent  genius  of  Anthony;  many  to  Lepidus:  but  when  Lepidus  was

become sunk and superannuated in sloth; when Anthony was lost headlong in

sensuality,  there  was  then  no  other  remedy  for  the  distracted  State,  rent

piecemeal  by  its  Chiefs,  but  the  sovereignty  of  one:  Augustus,  however,

never had assumed to be over his country King, or Dictator; but settled the

government under the legal name of Prince, or Chief of the Senate: he had

extended the Empire, and set for its bounds the distant ocean and rivers far

remote; the several parts and forces of the State, the legions, the provinces,

and the navy, were all properly balanced and connected; the citizens lived

dutifully under the protection of the law, the Allies in terms of respect, and

Rome  itself  was  adorned  with  magnificent  structures:  indeed,  in  a  few

instances he had exerted the arbitrary violence of power; and in but a few,

only to secure the peace of the whole.

 
In answer to all this, it was urged, that "his filial piety, and the unhappy

situation of the Republic, were pure pretences; but the ardent lust of reigning,

his true and only motive: with this spirit he had solicited into his service, by

bribery, a body of veteran soldiers: and though a private youth, without post

or magistracy, but, in defiance of law, levied an army: with this spirit he had

debauched and bought the Roman legions under the Consuls, while he was

falsely feigning a coalition with Pompey's republican party: that soon after,

when he had procured from the Senate, or rather usurped the honours and

authority of the Praetorship; and when Hirtius and Pansa, the two Consuls,

were  slain,  he  seized  both  their  armies:  that  it  was  doubted  whether  the

Consuls  fell  by  the  enemy,  or  whether  Pansa  was  not  killed  by  pouringpoison into his wounds; and Hirtius slain by his own soldiers; and whether

the young Caesar was not the black contriver of this bloody treason: that by

terror  he  had  extorted  the  Consulship  in  spite  of  the  Senate;  and  turned

against the Commonwealth the very arms with which the Commonwealth had

trusted  him  for  her  defence  against  Anthony.  Add  to  all  this  his  cruel

proscriptions, and the massacre of so many citizens, his seizing from the

public and distributing to his own creatures so many lands and possessions; a

violation  of  property  not  justified  even  by  those  who  gained  by  it.  But,

allowing him to dedicate to the Manes of the Dictator the lives of Brutus and

Cassius (though more to his honour had it been to have postponed his own

personal hate to public good), did he not betray the young Pompey by an

insidious peace, betray Lepidus by a deceitful show of friendship? Did he not

next  ensnare  Marc  Anthony,  first  by  treaties,  those  of  Tarentum  and

Brundusium;  then  by  a  marriage,  that  of  his  sister  Octavia?  And  did  not

Anthony at last pay with his life the penalty of that subdolous alliance? After

this, no doubt there was peace, but a bloody peace; bloody in the tragical

defeat of Lollius, and that of Varus, in Germany; and at Rome, the Varrones,

the Egnatii, the Julii (those illustrious names) were put to death." Nor was his

domestic life spared upon this occasion. "He had arbitrarily robbed Nero of

his wife big with child by her husband; and mocked the Gods by consulting

the Priests; whether religion permitted him to marry her before her delivery,

or obliged him to stay till after. His minions, Tedius and Vedius Pollio, had

lived  in  scandalous  and  excessive  luxury:  his  wife  Livia,  who  wholly

controlled him, had proved a cruel governess to the Commonwealth; and to

the  Julian  house,  a  more  cruel  step-mother:  he  had  even  invaded  the

incommunicable honours of the Gods, and setting up for himself temples like

theirs, would like them be adored in the image of a Deity, with all the sacred

solemnity  of  Priests  and  sacrifices:  nor  had  he  adopted  Tiberius  for  his

successor, either out of affection for him, or from concern for the public

welfare; but having discovered in him a spirit proud and cruel, he sought

future glory from the blackest opposition and comparison." For, Augustus,

when, a few years before, he solicited the Senate to grant to Tiberius another

term  of  the  authority  of  the  Tribuneship,  though  he  mentioned  him  with

honour,  yet  taking  notice  of  his  odd  humour,  behaviour,  and  manners,

dropped some expressions, which, while they seemed to excuse him, exposed

and upbraided him.

 As soon as the funeral of Augustus was over, a temple and divine worship

were  forthwith  decreed  him.  The  Senate  then  turned  their  instant

supplications to Tiberius, to fill his vacant place; but received an abstruse

answer, touching the greatness of the Empire and his own distrust of himself;

he said that "nothing but the divine genius of Augustus was equal to the

mighty task: that for himself, who had been called by him into a participation

of his cares, he had learnt by feeling them, what a daring, what a difficult toil

was  that  of  government,  and  how  perpetually  subject  to  the  caprices  of

fortune: that in a State supported by so many illustrious patriots they ought

not  to  cast  the  whole  administration  upon  one;  and  more  easy  to  be

administered were the several offices of the Government by the united pains

and sufficiency of many." A pompous and plausible speech, but in it little

faith and sincerity. Tiberius, even upon subjects which needed no disguises,

used  words  dark  and  cautious;  perhaps  from  his  diffident  nature,  perhaps

from a habit of dissembling: at this juncture indeed, as he laboured wholly to

hide his heart, his language was the more carefully wrapped up in equivoques

and obscurity: but the Senators, who dreaded nothing so much as to seem to

understand him, burst into tears, plaints, and vows; with extended arms they

supplicated  the  Gods,  invoked  the  image  of  Augustus,  and  embraced  the

knees of Tiberius. He then commanded the imperial register to be produced

and  recited.  It  contained  a  summary  of  the  strength  and  income  of  the

Empire, the number of Romans and auxiliaries in pay, the condition of the

navy, of the several kingdoms paying tribute, and of the various provinces

and their revenues, with the state of the public expense, the issues of the

exchequer, and all the demands upon the public. This register was all writ by

the hand of Augustus; and in it he had subjoined his counsel to posterity, that

the  present  boundaries  of  the  Empire  should  stand  fixed  without  further

enlargement; but whether this counsel was dictated by fear for the public, or

by envy towards his successors, is uncertain.

 
Now when the Senate was stooping to the vilest importunity and prostrations,

Tiberius happened to say, that, "as he was unequal to the weight of the whole

government; so if they entrusted him with any particular part, whatever it

were,  he  would  undertake  it."  Here  Asinius  Gallus  interposed:  "I  beg  to

know, Caesar," says he, "what part of the government you desire for your

share?" He was astonished with the unexpected question, and, for a short

space,  mute;  but  recovering  himself,  answered,  that  "it  ill  became  hismodesty to choose or reject any particular branch of the administration, when

he desired rather to be excused from the whole." Gallus, who in his face

conjectured sullen signs of displeasure, again accosted him, and said, "by this

question I did not mean that you should do an impracticable thing, and share

that  power  which  cannot  be  separated;  but  I  meant  to  reason  you  into  a

confession that the Commonwealth is but one body, and can be governed

only by one soul." He added an encomium upon Augustus, and reminded

Tiberius himself of his many victories, of the many civil employments which

he had long and nobly sustained: nor even thus could he mollify the wrath of

Tiberius,  who  had  long  hated  him,  for  that  Gallus  had  married  Vipsania,

daughter  of  Marcus  Agrippa,  and  formerly  wife  to  Tiberius,  who  thence

suspected that by this match he meant to soar above the rank of a subject, and

possessed too the bold and haughty spirit of Asinius Pollio his father.

 
Lucius Arruntius incurred his displeasure next, by a speech not much unlike

that of Gallus: it is true, that towards him Tiberius bore no old rancour; but

Arruntius had mighty opulence, prompt parts, noble accomplishments, with

equal popularity, and hence was marked by him with a fell eye of suspicion.

For, as Augustus, shortly before his decease, was mentioning those among

the great men, who were capable of the supreme power, but would not accept

it; or unequal to it, yet wished for it; or such, as had both ambition and

sufficiency; he had said, that "Marcus Lepidus was qualified, but would reject

it;  Asinius  would  be  aspiring,  but  had  inferior  talents;  and  that  Lucius

Arruntius wanted no sufficiency, and upon a proper occasion would attempt

it." That he spoke thus of Lepidus and Asinius, is agreed; but, instead of

Arruntius, some writers have transmitted the name of Cneius Piso: and every

one of these great men, except Lepidus, were afterwards cut off, under the

imputation of various crimes, all darkly framed by Tiberius. Quintus Haterius

and Mamercus Scaurus did thereafter incense his distrustful spirit; the first by

asking  him,  "How  long,  Caesar,  wilt  thou  suffer  the  Commonwealth  to

remain destitute of a head?" Scaurus, because he had said "there was room to

hope that the prayers of the Senate would not prove abortive, since he had not

opposed as Tribune, nor rendered invalid, as he might, the motion of the

Consuls  in  his  behalf."  With  Haterius  he  fell  into  instant  rage;  towards

Scaurus  his  resentment  was  more  deep  and  implacable,  and  in  profound

silence he hid it. Wearied at last with public importunity and clamour, and

with particular expostulations, he began to unbend a little; not that he wouldown his undertaking the Empire, but only avoid the uneasiness of perpetually

rejecting endless solicitations. It is known how Haterius, when he went next

day  to  the  palace  to  implore  pardon,  and  throwing  himself  at  the  feet  of

Tiberius embraced his knees, narrowly escaped being slain by the soldiers;

because Tiberius, who was walking, tumbled down, whether by chance, or

whether his legs were entangled in the arms of Haterius: neither was he a jot

mollified by the danger which threatened so great a man, who was at length

forced to supplicate Augusta for protection; nor could even she obtain it, but

after the most laboured entreaties.

 
Towards Livia, too, exorbitant was the flattering court of the Senate. Some

were for decreeing her the general title of Mother; others the more particular

one of Mother Of Her Country; and almost all moved, that to the name of

Tiberius should be added, The Son Of Julia: Tiberius urged in answer, that

"public honours to women ought to be warily adjudged, and with a sparing

hand; and that with the same measure of moderation he would receive such as

were presented to himself." In truth, full of envy as he was, and anxious lest

his own grandeur should sink as that of his mother rose, he would not suffer

so much as a Lictor to be decreed her, and even forbade the raising her an

altar upon her late adoption, or paying her any such solemnities. But for

Germanicus he asked the Proconsular power; and to carry him that dignity,

honourable deputies were sent, as also to mollify his sorrow for the death of

Augustus. If for Drusus he demanded not the same honour, it was because

Drusus  was  present  and  already  Consul  designed.  He  then  named  twelve

candidates for the Praetorship; the same number settled by Augustus; and

though the Senate requested him to increase it, by an oath he bound himself

never to exceed.

 
The  privilege  of  creating  Magistrates  was  now  first  translated  from  the

assemblies of the people to the Senate; for though the Emperor had before

conducted all affairs of moment at his pleasure; yet till that day some were

still transacted by the Tribes, and carried by their bent and suffrages. Neither

did the regret of the people for the seizure of these their ancient rights rise

higher than some impotent grumbling. The Senate too liked the change; as by

it they were released from the charge of buying votes, and from the shame of

begging them: and so moderate was Tiberius, that of the twelve candidates he

only reserved to himself the recommendation of four, to be accepted without

opposition or caballing. At the same time, the Tribunes of the people askedleave to celebrate at their own expense certain plays in honour of Augustus,

such as were to be called after his name, and inserted in the calendar. But it

was decreed, that out of the Exchequer the charge should be defrayed, and the

Tribunes should in the circus wear the triumphal robe; but to be carried in

chariots was denied them. The annual celebration of these plays was, for the

future, transferred to one of the Praetors, him in particular to whom should

fall the jurisdiction of deciding suits between citizens and strangers.

 
Thus stood affairs at Rome when a sedition seized the legions in Pannonia;

without any fresh grounds, save that from a change of Princes, they meant to

assume a warrant for licentiousness and tumult, and from a civil war hoped

great earnings and acquisitions: they were three legions encamped together,

all commanded by Junius Blesus, who, upon notice of the death of Augustus

and the accession of Tiberius, had granted the soldiers a recess from their

wonted duties for some days, as a time either of public mourning or festivity.

From being idle they waxed wanton, quarrelsome, and turbulent; greedily

listened to mutinous discourses; the most profligate amongst them had most

credit with them, and at last they became passionate for a life of sloth and

riot, utterly averse to all military discipline and every fatigue of the camp. In

the camp was one Percennius; formerly a busy leader in the embroilments of

the theatre, and now a common soldier; a fellow of a petulant, declaiming

tongue, and by inflaming parties in the playhouse, well qualified to excite and

infatuate a crowd. This incendiary practised upon the ignorant and unwary,

such as were solicitous what might prove their future usage, now Augustus

was dead. He engaged them in nightly confabulations, and by little and little

incited them to violence and disorders; and towards the evening, when the

soberest and best affected were withdrawn, he assembled the worst and most

turbulent.  When  he  had  thus  ripened  them  for  sedition,  and  other  ready

incendiaries were combined with him, he personated the character of a lawful

Commander, and thus questioned and harangued them:

 
"Why did they obey, like slaves, a few Centurions and a fewer Tribunes?

When  would  they  be  bold  enough  to  demand  redress  of  their  heavy

grievances, unless they snatched the present occasion, while the Emperor was

yet new and his authority wavering, to prevail with him by petition, or by

arms to force him? They had already by the misery of many years paid dear

for their patient sloth and stupid silence, since decrepit with age and maimed

with wounds, after a course of service for thirty or forty years, they were stilldoomed to carry arms: nor even to those who were discharged was there any

end of the misery of warfare; they were still kept tied to the colours, and

under  the  creditable  title  of  Veterans  endured  the  same  hardships,  and

underwent  the  same  labours.  But  suppose  any  of  them  escaped  so  many

dangers, and survived so many calamities, where was their reward at last?

Why, a long and weary march remained yet to be taken into countries far

remote and strange; where, under the name of lands given them to cultivate,

they had unhospitable bogs to drain, and the wild wastes of mountains to

manure. Severe and ungainful of itself was the occupation of war: ten Asses

[Footnote: About 5d.] a day the poor price of their persons and lives; out of

this, they must buy clothes, and tents, and arms; out of this, bribe the cruel

Centurions for a forbearance of blows, and occasional exemption from hard

duty: but stripes from their officers, and wounds from their enemies, hard

winters and laborious summers, bloody wars and barren peace, were miseries

without end: nor remained there other cure or relief than to refuse to enlist but

upon conditions certain, and fixed by themselves; particularly, that their pay

be a denarius or sixteen Asses a day, [Footnote: About 8-1/2d.] sixteen years

be the utmost term of serving; when discharged, to be no longer obliged to

follow the colours, but have their reward in ready money, paid them in the

camp where they earned it. Did the Praetorian Guards, they who had double

pay, they who after sixteen years' service were paid off and sent home, bear

severer difficulties, undergo superior dangers? He did not mean to detract

from the merit of their brethren the City guards; their own lot however it was,

to be placed amongst horrid and barbarous nations, nor could they look from

their tents, but they saw the foe."

 
The whole crowd received this harangue with shouts of applause; but from

various  instigations.  Some  displayed  upon  their  bodies  the  obvious

impressions of stripes, others their hoary heads, many their vestments ragged

and curtailed, with backs utterly bare; as did all, their various griefs, in the

bitterness of reproach. At length to such excessive fury they grew, that they

proposed  to  incorporate  the  three  legions  into  one;  nor  by  aught  but

emulation was the project defeated: for to his own legion every man claimed

the prerogative of swallowing and denominating the other two. They took

another method, and placed the three Eagles of the legions, with the standards

of  the  several  cohorts,  altogether  without  rank  or  priority;  then  forthwith

digged turf and were rearing a tribunal, one high enough to be seen at adistance. In this hurry arrived Blesus, who, falling into sore rebukes, and by

force interrupting particulars, called with vehemence to all: "Dip your hands

rather in my blood: to murder your General will be a crime less shameful and

heinous  than  to  revolt  from  your  Prince;  for  determined  I  am,  either  to

preserve the legions in their faith and obedience, if you kill me not for my

intended good office; or my death, if I fall by your hands, shall hasten your

remorse."

 
For all this, turfs were accumulated, and the work was already breast high,

when, at last, overcome by his spirit and perseverance, they forbore. Blesus

was an able speaker: he told them "that sedition and mutiny were not the

methods of conveying to the Emperor the pretensions of the soldiers; their

demands too were new and singular; such as neither the soldiers of old had

ever  made  to  the  ancient  Generals,  nor  they  themselves  to  the  deified

Augustus: besides, their claims were ill-timed, when the Prince, just upon his

accession,  was  already  embarrassed  with  the  weight  and  variety  of  other

cares. If, however, they meant to try to gain in full peace those concessions,

which, even after a civil war, the conquerors never claimed; yet why trample

upon  duty  and  obedience,  why  reject  the  laws  of  the  army,  and  rules  of

discipline? And if they meant to petition, why meditate violence? They might

at  least  appoint  deputies;  and  in  his  presence  trust  them  with  their

pretensions." Here they all cried out, "that the son of Blesus, one of their

Tribunes,  should  execute  that  deputation;  and  demand  in  their  name  that,

after sixteen years' service they should be discharged: they said they would

give him new orders, when he had succeeded in these." After the departure of

the young officer, a moderate recess ensued; the soldiers however exulted to

have carried such a point: the sending the son of their General, as the public

advocate for their cause, was to them full proof that they had gained by force

and terror that which by modesty and gentle means they would never have

gained.

 
In the meantime those companies which, before the sedition began, were sent

to  Nauportum  [Footnote:  Over-Laybach,  in  Carniola.]  to  mend  roads  and

bridges, and upon other duties, no sooner heard of the uproar in the camp, but

they  cast  off  all  obedience,  tore  away  the  ensigns,  and  plundered  the

neighbouring villages; even Nauportum itself, which for greatness resembled

a  municipal  town,  was  plundered.  The  endeavours  of  the  Centurions  to

restrain this violence, were first returned with mockery and contempt, thenwith  invectives  and  contumelies,  at  last  with  outrage  and  blows.  Their

vengeance was chiefly bent against the Camp-Marshal, Aufidienus Rufus:

him they dragged from his chariot, and, loading him with baggage, drove him

before the first ranks; they then insulted him, and asked in scorn, "whether he

would gladly bear such enormous burdens, whether endure such immense

marches?" Rufus had been long a common soldier, then became a Centurion,

and afterwards Camp-Marshal; a severe restorer of primitive strictness and

discipline; an indefatigable observer of every military duty, which he exacted

from others with the more rigour, as he had himself undergone them all with

patience.

 
By the arrival of this tumultuous band the sedition was again awakened to its

former outrage, and the seditious, roving abroad without control, ravaged the

country  on  every  side.  Blesus,  for  an  example  of  terror  to  the  rest,

commanded those who were most laden with plunder, to be punished with

stripes and cast into prison: for the General was still dutifully obeyed by the

Centurions, and by all the soldiers of any merit; but the criminals refused to

submit, and even struggled with the guard who were carrying them off; they

clasped the knees of the bystanders, implored help from their fellows, now

calling upon every individual, and conjuring them by their particular names;

then appealed to them in a body, and supplicated the company, the cohort, the

legion  to  which  they  belonged;  warning  and  proclaiming  that  the  same

ignominy and chastisement hung over them all. With the same breath they

heaped  invectives  without  measure  upon  their  General,  and  called  upon

heaven and all the Gods to be their witnesses and avengers; nor left they

aught unattempted to raise effectual hatred, compassion, terror, and every

species of fury. Hence the whole body rushed to their relief, burst open the

prison,  unbound  and  rescued  the  prisoners:  thus  they  owned  for  their

brethren, and incorporated with themselves, infamous revolters, and traitors

convict and condemned.

 
Hence the violence became more raging, and hence more sedition from more

leaders.  There  was  particularly  one  Vibulenus,  a  common  soldier,  who,

exalted on the shoulders of his comrades, before the tribunal of Blesus, thus

declaimed in the ears of a multitude already outrageous, and eager to hear

what  he  had  to  say.  "To  these  innocents,"  says  he,  "to  these  miserable

sufferers, our fellow-soldiers, you have indeed restored breath and liberty:

but who will restore life to my poor brother; who my poor brother to me? Hewas sent hither by the German armies, with propositions for our common

good; and for this, was last night butchered by that same Blesus, who in the

murder employed his gladiators, bloody men, whom he purposely entertains

and arms for our common execution. Where, oh where, Blesus, hast thou

thrown  his  unoffending  and  mangled  corpse?  Even  open  enemies  do  not

inhumanly deny burial to the slain: when I have satiated my sorrow with a

thousand kisses, and a flood of tears; command me also to be murdered, that

these our brethren may together bury my poor brother and me, slaughtered

both  as  victims,  yet  both  guiltless  of  any  crime  but  that  of  studying  the

common interest of the legions."

 
He inflamed those his complaints and expostulations with affecting sighs and

lamentations, beat his breast, tore his face, and showed all the symptoms of

anguish. Then those who carried him giving way, he threw himself headlong

at the feet of his companions; and thus prostrate and supplicating, in them

raised such a spirit of commiseration and such a storm of vengeance, that one

party of them instantly seized and bound the General's gladiators; another, the

rest of his family; while many ran and dispersed themselves to search for the

corpse: and had it not been quickly manifest that there was no corpse to be

found, that the slaves of Blesus had upon the rack cleared themselves, and

that Vibulenus never had any brother; they had gone nigh to have sacrificed

the General. As it was, they expulsed the Camp-Marshal and Tribunes; and as

they fled, plundered their baggage: they likewise put to death Lucilius the

Centurion, whom they had sarcastically named Cedo Alteram, because when

upon the back of a soldier he had broken one wand, he was wont to call for

another, and then a third. The other Centurions lurked in concealment, all but

Julius Clemens, who for his prompt capacity was saved, in order to manage

the negotiations of the soldiers: even two of the legions, the eighth and the

fifteenth, were ready to turn their swords upon each other; and had, but for

the ninth: one Sirpicus, a centurion, was the subject of the quarrel; him the

eighth required to be put to death, and the fifteenth protected him; but the

ninth interposed with entreaties to both, and with threats to those who would

not listen to prayers.

 
Tiberius, however, close and impenetrable, and ever labouring to smother all

melancholy tidings, was yet driven by those from Pannonia, to despatch his

son Drusus thither, accompanied by the principal nobility and guarded by two

Praetorian cohorts; but charged with no precise instructions, only to adapt hismeasures  to  the  present  exigency:  the  cohorts  were  strengthened  with  an

extraordinary addition of chosen men, with the greatest part of the Praetorian

horse,  and  main  body  of  the  German,  then  the  Emperor's  guards.  Aelius

Sejanus, lately joined with his father Strabo in the command of the Praetorian

bands, was also sent, not only as Governor to the young Prince, but as his

credit with the Emperor was known to be mighty, to deal with the revolters

by promises and terrors. When Drusus approached, the legions, for show of

respect, marched out to meet him; not with the usual symptoms and shouts of

joy,  nor  with  gay  ensigns  and  arms  glittering,  but  in  a  dress  and

accoutrements  hideous  and  squalid:  in  their  countenances  too,  though

composed to sadness, were seen greater marks of sullenness and contumacy.

 
As soon as he was within the camp, they secured the entrances with guards,

and in several quarters of it placed parties upon duty: the rest crowded about

the tribunal of Drusus, who stood beckoning with his hand for silence. Here

as often as they surveyed their own numbers and met one another's resentful

looks, they uttered their rage in horrible cries: again, when upon the tribunal

they beheld Caesar, awe and trembling seized them: now, there prevailed an

hollow and inarticulate murmur; next, a furious clamour; then suddenly a

dead silence: so that, by a hasty succession of opposite passions, they were at

once dismayed and dreadful. When at last the uproar was stayed, he read his

father's letters, who in them declared, "that he would take an affectionate care

of the brave and invincible legions by whom he had sustained successfully so

many wars; and, as soon as his grief was a little abated, deal with the Senate

about their demands; in the meantime he had sent them his son, on purpose to

make  them  forthwith  all  the  concessions,  which  could  instantly  be  made

them: the rest were to be reserved for the Senate, the proper distributers of

rewards and punishments by a right altogether unalienable."

 
The assembly answered, that to Julius Clemens they had intrusted what to

speak in their name: he began with their demands, "to be discharged after

sixteen years' service, to have the reward which, for past services upon that

discharge, they claimed; their pay to be increased to a Roman denarius; the

veterans to be no longer detained under their ensigns." When Drusus urged,

that wholly in the judgment of the Senate and his father, these matters rested

he was interrupted by their clamours: "To what purpose came he; since he

could neither augment their pay, nor alleviate their grievances? and while

upon them every officer was allowed to inflict blows and death, the son oftheir Emperor wanted power to relieve them by one beneficent action. The

policy this of the late reign, when Tiberius frustrated every request of the

soldiers, by referring all to Augustus; now Drusus was come with the same

artifices to delude them: were they never to have a higher visit than from the

children of their Prince? It was, indeed, unaccountable, that to the Senate the

Emperor should leave no part in the direction of the army, only the rewarding

of the soldiery: ought not the same Senate to be consulted as often as a battle

was  to  be  fought,  or  a  private  man  to  be  punished?  or,  were  their

recompenses  to  be  adjudged  by  many  masters,  but  their  punishments  to

remain without any restraint or moderator whatsoever?"

 
At last they abandoned the tribunal, and with menaces and insults fell upon

all they met belonging to Drusus, either as guards or friends; meditating thus

to provoke a quarrel, and an introduction to blood. Chiefly enraged they were

against Cneius Lentulus, as one for years and warlike renown superior to any

about  the  person  of  Drusus,  and  thence  suspected  to  have  hardened  the

Prince,  and  been  himself  the  foremost  to  despise  these  outrages  in  the

soldiery: nor was it long after, that as he was leaving Drusus, and from the

foresight of danger returning to the winter quarters, they surrounded him and

demanded "whither he went? to the Emperor or Senate? there also to exercise

his enmity to the legions, and oppose their interest?" and instantly assaulted

him  with  stones.  He  was  already  covered  with  wounds  and  blood,  and

awaiting certain assassination, when the troops attending Drusus flew to his

assistance and saved him.

 
The  following  night  had  a  formidable  aspect,  and  threatened  the  speedy

eruption of some tragical vengeance; when a phenomenon intervened and

assuaged all. The Moon, in the midst of a clear sky, seemed to the soldiers

suddenly to sicken; and they, who were ignorant of the natural cause, took

this for an omen foreboding the issue of their present adventures: to their own

labours, they compared the eclipse of the planet; and prophesied, "that if to

the distressed Goddess should be restored her wonted brightness and vigour,

equally successful would be the issue of these their struggles." Hence they

strove  to  charm  and  revive  her  with  sounds,  and  by  ringing  upon  brazen

metal, and an uproar of trumpets and cornets, made a vehement bellowing.

As  she  appeared  brighter  or  darker,  they  exulted  or  lamented;  but  when

gathering clouds had utterly bereft them of her sight, and they believed her

now buried in everlasting darkness; then, as minds once thoroughly dismayedare pliant to superstition, they bewailed "their own eternal sufferings thus

portended,  and  that  against  their  misdeeds  the  angry  Deities  were

contending." Drusus, who thought it behoved him to improve this disposition

of theirs, and to reap the fruits of wisdom from the operations of chance;

ordered certain persons to go round, and apply to them from tent to tent. For

this  purpose,  he  called  and  employed  the  Centurion  Julius  Clemens,  and

whoever  else  were  by  honest  methods  acceptable  to  the  multitude.  These

insinuated themselves everywhere, with those who kept watch, or were upon

patrol, or guarded the gates; soothing all with hopes, and by terrors rousing

them. "How long," said they, "shall we hold the son of our Emperor thus

besieged? Where will our broils and wild contentions end? Shall we swear

allegiance  to  Percennius  and  Vibulenus?  Will  Vibulenus  and  Percennius

support  us  with  pay  during  our  service,  and  reward  us  with  lands  when

dismissed? In short, shall two common men dispossess the Neros and the

Drusi, and to themselves assume the Empire of the Roman People? Let us be

wiser; and as we were the last to revolt, be the first to relent. Such demands,

as  comprise  terms  for  all,  are  ever  slowly  accorded;  but  particulars  may,

when  they  please,  merit  instant  favour,  and  instantly  receive  it."  These

reasonings alarmed them, and filled them with mutual jealousies. Presently

the  fresh  soldiers  forsook  the  veterans,  and  one  legion  separated  from

another;  then  by  degrees  returned  the  love  of  duty  and  obedience.  They

relinquished the guard of the gates: and the Eagles and other ensigns, which

in the beginning of the tumult they had thrown together, were now restored

each to its distinct station.

 
Drusus, as soon as it was day, summoned an assembly, and though unskilled

in speaking, yet with a haughtiness inherent in his blood, rebuked their past

and commended their present behaviour. "With threats and terrors," he said,

"it  was  impossible  to  subdue  him;  but  if  he  saw  them  reclaimed  to

submission, if from them he heard the language of supplicants, he would send

to his father to accept with a reconciled spirit the petitions of the legions,"

Hence, at their entreaty, for their deputy to Tiberius the same Blesus was

again despatched, and with him Lucius Apronius, a Roman Knight of the

cohort of Drusus; and Justus Catonius, a Centurion of the first order. There

followed  great  debates  in  the  council  of  Drusus,  while  some  advised  "to

suspend all proceeding till the return of the deputies, and by a course of

courtesy the while to soothe the soldiers; others maintained, that remediesmore potent must needs be applied: in a multitude, was to be found nothing

on this side extremes; always imperious where they are not awed, and to be

without  danger  despised  when  frightened:  to  their  present  terror  from

superstition was to be added the dread of their General, by his dooming to

death the authors of the sedition." Rather prompt to rigorous counsels was the

genius  of  Drusus:  Vibulenus  and  Percennius  were  produced,  and  by  his

command executed; it is by many recounted, that in his own tent they were

secretly  despatched  and  buried;  by  others,  that  their  bodies  were

ignominiously  thrown  over  the  entrenchments,  for  a  public  spectacle  of

terror.

 
Search was then made for other remarkable incendiaries. Some were caught

skulking without the camp, and there by the Centurions or Praetorian soldiers

slain; others were by their several companies delivered up, as a proof of their

own sincere faith. The consternation of the soldiers was heightened by the

precipitate accession of winter, with rains incessant and so violent, that they

were unable to stir from their tents, or maintain common intercourse, nay,

scarce  to  preserve  their  standards,  assaulted  continually  by  tempestuous

winds and raging floods. Dread besides of the angry Gods still possessed

them; nor was it at random, they thought, that such profane traitors were thus

visited with black eclipses and roaring tempests; neither against these their

calamities was there other relief than the relinquishing of a camp by impiety

contaminated and accursed, and after expiation of their guilt returning to their

several garrisons. The eighth legion departed first; and then the fifteenth: the

ninth, with earnest clamours, pressed for continuing there till the letters from

Tiberius arrived; but when deserted by the other two, their courage failed, and

by following of their own accord, they prevented the shame of being forced.

Drusus seeing order and tranquillity restored, without staying for the return of

the deputies, returned himself to Rome.

 
Almost at the same time, and from the same causes, the legions in Germany

raised  an  insurrection,  with  greater  numbers,  and  thence  with  more  fury.

Passionate too were their hopes that Germanicus would never brook the rule

of another, but yield to the spirit of the legions, who had force sufficient to

bring the whole Empire under his sway. Upon the Rhine were two armies;

that called the higher, commanded by Caius Silius, Lieutenant- General; the

lower, by Aulus Caecina: the command in chief rested in Germanicus, then

busy collecting the tribute in Gaul. The forces however under Silius, withcautious ambiguity, watched the success of the revolt which others began: for

the soldiers of the lower army had broken out into open outrages, which took

its rise from the fifth legion, and the one- and-twentieth; who after them drew

the  first,  and  twentieth.  These  were  altogether  upon  the  frontiers  of  the

Ubians, passing the campaign in utter idleness or light duty: so that upon the

news that Augustus was dead, the whole swarm of new soldiers lately levied

in the city, men accustomed to the effeminacies of Rome, and impatient of

every military hardship, began to possess the ignorant minds of the rest with

many turbulent expectations, "that now was presented the lucky juncture for

veterans to demand entire dismission; the fresh soldiers, larger pay; and all,

some mitigation of their miseries; as also to return due vengeance for the

cruelties  of  the  Centurions."  These  were  not  the  harangues  of  a  single

incendiary, like Percennius amongst the Pannonian legions; nor uttered, as

there, in the ears of men who, while they saw before their eyes armies greater

than their own, mutinied with awe and trembling: but here was a sedition of

many mouths, filled with many boasts, "that in their hands lay the power and

fate of Rome; by their victories the empire was enlarged, and from them the

Caesars took, as a compliment, the surname of Germanicus."

 
Neither  did  Caecina  strive  to  restrain  them.  A  madness  so  extensive  had

bereft him of all his bravery and firmness. In this precipitate frenzy they

rushed at once, with swords drawn, upon the Centurions, the eternal objects

of their resentment, and always the first victims to their vengeance. Them

they dragged to the earth, and upon each bestowed a terrible portion of sixty

blows; a number proportioned to that of Centurions in a legion. Then bruised,

mangled, and half expiring, as they were, they cast them all out of the camp,

some into the stream of the Rhine. Septimius, who had for refuge fled to the

tribunal  of  Caecina,  and  lay  clasping  his  feet,  was  demanded  with  such

imperious vehemence, that he was forced to be surrendered to destruction.

Cassius Cherea (afterwards famous to posterity for killing Caligula), then a

young man of undaunted spirit, and one of the Centurions, boldly opened

himself a passage with his sword through a crowd of armed foes striving to

seize him. After this no further authority remained to the Tribunes, none to

the Camp-Marshals. The seditious soldiers were their own officers; set the

watch,  appointed  the  guard,  and  gave  all  orders  proper  in  the  present

exigency;  hence  those  who  dived  deepest  into  the  spirit  of  the  soldiery,

gathered  a  special  indication  how  powerful  and  obdurate  the  presentinsurrection was like to prove; for in their conduct were no marks of a rabble,

where every man's will guides him, or the instigation of a few controls the

whole. Here, all at once they raged, and all at once kept silence; with so much

concert  and  steadiness,  that  you  would  have  believed  them  under  the

sovereign direction of one.

 
To Germanicus the while, then receiving, as I have said, the tribute in Gaul,

news  were  brought  of  the  decease  of  Augustus;  whose  grand-daughter

Agrippina he had to wife, and by her many children: he was himself the

grandson of Livia, by her son Drusus, the brother of Tiberius; but ever under

heavy anxiety from the secret hate which his uncle and grandmother bore

him: hate the more virulent as its grounds were altogether unrighteous; for,

dear and adored was the memory of his father Drusus amongst the Roman

People,  and  from  him  was  firmly  expected  that  had  he  succeeded  to  the

Empire,  he  would  have  restored  public  liberty:  hence  their  zeal  for

Germanicus, and of him the same hopes conceived; as from his youth he

possessed a popular spirit, and marvellous affability utterly remote from the

comportment  and  address  of  Tiberius,  ever  haughty  and  mysterious.  The

animosities  too  between  the  ladies  administered  fresh  fuel;  while  towards

Agrippina, Livia was actuated by the despite natural to step-mothers: and

over-tempestuous  was  the  indignation  of  Agrippina;  only  that  her  known

chastity and love for her husband, always gave her mind, however vehement,

a virtuous turn.

 
But Germanicus, the nearer he stood to supreme rule, the more vigour he

exerted  to  secure  it  to  Tiberius:  to  him  he  obliged  the  Sequanians,  a

neighbouring  people,  as  also  the  several  Belgic  cities,  to  swear  present

allegiance; and the moment he learnt the uproar of the legions, posted thither:

he found them advanced without the camp to receive him, with eyes cast

down,  in  feigned  token  of  remorse.  After  he  entered  the  entrenchments,

instantly his ears were filled with plaints and grievances, uttered in hideous

and mixed clamours: nay, some catching his hand, as if they meant to kiss it,

thrust  his  fingers  into  their  mouths,  to  feel  their  gums  destitute  of  teeth;

others showed their limbs enfeebled, and bodies stooping under old age. As

he  saw  the  assembly  mixed  at  random,  he  commanded  them  "to  range

themselves into companies, thence more distinctly to hear his answers; as

also to place before them their several ensigns, that the cohorts at least might

be distinguished." 
With slowness and reluctance it was, that they obeyed him; then beginning

with an encomium upon the "venerable memory of Augustus," he proceeded

to the "many victories and many triumphs of Tiberius," and with peculiar

praises celebrated the "glorious and immortal deeds, which with these very

legions in Germany he had accomplished;" he next boasted the quiet state of

things, the consent of all Italy, the loyal faith of both the Gauls: and every

quarter of the Roman State exempt from disaffection and turbulence.

 
Thus far they listened with silence, at least with moderate murmuring; but the

moment  he  touched  their  sedition  and  questioned,  "where  now  was  the

wonted modesty of soldiers? where the glory of ancient discipline? whither

had they chased their Tribunes, whither their Centurions?" to a man, they

stripped themselves to the skin, and there exposed the seams of their wounds

and  bruises  of  their  chastisements,  in  the  rage  of  reproach.  Then  in  the

undistinguished  voice  of  uproar,  they  urged  "the  exactions  for  occasional

exemptions,  their  scanty  pay,  and  their  rigorous  labours;"  which  they

represented in a long detail: "ramparts to be reared, entrenchments digged,

trees felled and drawn, forage cut and carried, fuel prepared and fetched,"

with every other article of toil required by the exigencies of war, or to prevent

idleness  in  the  soldiery.  Above  all,  from  the  veterans  arose  a  cry  most

horrible: they enumerated thirty years or upwards undergone in the service;

"and  besought  that  to  men  utterly  spent  he  would  administer  respite,  nor

suffer them to be beholden to death for the last relief from their toils; but

discharge them from a warfare so lasting and severe, and grant them the

means of a comfortable recess." Nay, some there were who of him required

the money bequeathed them by Augustus; and towards Germanicus uttering

zealous vows, with omens of happy fortune, declared their cordial attachment

to  his  cause  if  he  would  himself  assume  the  Empire.  Here,  as  if  already

stained with their treason, he leaped headlong from the Tribunal; but with

swords  drawn  they  opposed  his  departure,  and  threatened  his  life,  if  he

refused to return: yet, with passionate protestations that "he would rather die

than be a traitor," he snatched his sword from his side, and aiming full at his

breast, would have buried it there, had not those who were next him seized

his hand and by force restrained him. A cluster of soldiers in the extremity of

the assembly exhorted him, nay, what is incredible to hear, some particulars

advancing nearer, exhorted him to strike home: in truth one Calusidius, a

common soldier, presented him his naked sword, and added, "it is sharperthan  your  own;"  a  behaviour  which  to  the  rest,  outrageous  as  they  were,

seemed savage, and of horrid example: hence the friends of Germanicus had

time to snatch him away to his tent.

 
It  was  here  consulted  what  remedy  to  apply:  for  it  was  advised,  that

"ministers of sedition were preparing to be despatched to the other army, to

draw them too into a confederacy in the revolt; that the capital of the Ubians

was destined to be sacked; and if their hands were once inured to plunder,

they would break in, and ravage all Gaul." This dread was augmented by

another: the enemy knew of the sedition in the Roman army, and were ready

to invade the Empire, if its barrier the Rhine were left unguarded. Now, to

arm  the  allies  and  the  auxiliaries  of  Rome,  and  lead  them  against  the

departing legions, was to rouse a civil war: severity was dangerous: the way

of largesses infamous; and alike threatening it was to the State to grant the

turbulent soldiers nothing, or yield them everything. After revolving every

reason  and  objection,  the  result  was,  to  feign  letters  and  directions  from

Tiberius,  "that  those  who  had  served  twenty  years  should  be  finally

discharged;  such  as  served  sixteen  be  under  the  ensign  and  privileges  of

veterans, released from every duty but that of repulsing the enemy; and the

legacy, which they demanded, should be paid and doubled."

 
The  soldiers,  who  perceived  that,  purely  to  evade  present  difficulty,  the

concessions  were  forged,  insisted  to  have  them  forthwith  executed;  and

instantly the Tribunes despatched the discharge of the veterans: that of the

money was adjourned to their several winter quarters; but the fifth legion, and

the one-and-twentieth, refused to stir, till in that very camp they were paid; so

that  out  of  the  money  reserved  by  himself  and  his  friends  for  travailing

expenses, Germanicus was obliged to raise the sum. Caecina, Lieutenant-

General, led the first legion and twentieth back to the capital of the Ubians:

an infamous march, when the plunder of their General's coffers was carried

amidst the ensigns and Roman Eagles. Germanicus, the while, proceeding to

the army in higher Germany, brought the second, thirteenth, and sixteenth

legions  to  swear  allegiance  without  hesitation:  to  the  fourteenth,  who

manifested some short suspense, he made unasked a tender of their money,

and a present discharge.

 
But a party of veterans which belonged to the disorderly legions, and then in

garrison among the Chaucians, as they began a sedition there, were somewhatquelled  by  the  instant  execution  of  two  of  their  body:  an  execution  this,

commanded by Maenius, Camp-Marshal, and rather of good example, than

done by competent authority. The tumult, however, swelling again with fresh

rage, he fled, but was discovered; so that, finding no safety in lurking, from

his own bravery he drew his defence, and declared "that to himself, who was

only their Camp-Marshal, these their outrages were not done, but done to the

authority  of  Germanicus,  their  General,  to  the  majesty  of  Tiberius  their

Emperor."  At  the  same  time,  braving  and  dismaying  all  that  would  have

stopped him, he fiercely snatched the colours, faced about towards the Rhine,

and pronouncing the doom of traitors and deserters to every man who forsook

his ranks, brought them back to their winter quarters, mutinous, in truth, but

not daring to mutiny.

 
In the meantime the deputies from the Senate met Germanicus at the altar of

the Ubians [Footnote: Cologne.], whither in his return he was arrived. Two

legions wintered there, the first and twentieth, with the soldiers lately placed

under the standard of veterans; men already under the distractions of guilt

and fear: and now a new terror possessed them, that these Senators were

come armed with injunctions to cancel every concession which they had by

sedition extorted; and, as it is the custom of the crowd to be ever charging

somebody with the crimes suggested by their own false alarms, the guilt of

this imaginary decree they laid upon Minutius Plancus, a Senator of consular

dignity, and at the head of this deputation. In the dead of night, they began to

clamour aloud for the purple standard placed in the quarters of Germanicus,

and, rushing tumultuously to his gate, burst the doors, dragged the Prince out

of his bed, and, with menaces of present death, compelled him to deliver the

standard. Then, as they roved about the camp, they met the deputies, who,

having learnt the outrage, were hastening to Germanicus: upon them they

poured a deluge of contumelies, and to present slaughter were devoting them,

Plancus chiefly, whom the dignity of his character had restrained from flight;

nor in this mortal danger had he other refuge than the quarters of the first

legion, where, embracing the Eagle and other ensigns, he sought sanctuary

from the religious veneration ever paid them. But, in spite of religion, had not

Calpurnius,  the  Eagle-bearer,  by  force  defeated  the  last  violence  of  the

assault, in the Roman camp had been slain an ambassador of the Roman

People, and with his blood had been stained the inviolable altars of the Gods;

a barbarity rare even in the camp of an enemy. At last, day returning, whenthe  General,  and  the  soldiers,  and  their  actions  could  be  distinguished,

Germanicus  entered  the  camp,  and  commanding  Plancus  to  be  brought,

seated him by himself upon the tribunal: he then inveighed against the late

"pernicious frenzy, which in it, he said, had fatality, and was rekindled by no

despite in the soldiers, but by that of the angry Gods." He explained the

genuine purposes of that embassy, and lamented with affecting eloquence

"the outrage committed upon Plancus, altogether brutal and unprovoked; the

foul violence done to the sacred person of an Ambassador, and the mighty

disgrace from thence derived upon the legion." Yet as the assembly showed

more stupefaction than calmness, he dismissed the deputies under a guard of

auxiliary horse.

 
During this affright, Germanicus was by all men censured, "that he retired not

to the higher army, whence he had been sure of ready obedience, and even of

succour against the revolters: already he had taken wrong measures more

than enow, by discharging some, rewarding all, and other tender counsels; if

he despised his own safety, yet why expose his infant son, why his wife big

with child, to the fury of outrageous traitors, wantonly violating all the most

sacred rights amongst men? It became him at least to restore his wife and son

safe to Tiberius and to the State." He was long unresolved; besides Agrippina

was  averse  to  leave  him,  and  urged,  that  "she  was  the  grand-daughter  of

Augustus, and it was below her spirit to shrink in a time of danger." But

embracing her and their little son, with great tenderness and many tears, he

prevailed with her to depart. Thus there marched miserably along a band of

helpless women: the wife of a great commander fled like a fugitive, and upon

her bosom bore her infant son: about her a troop of other ladies, dragged from

their husbands, and drowned in tears, uttering their heavy lamentations; nor

weaker than theirs was the grief felt by all who remained.

 
These groans and tears, and this spectacle of woe, the appearances rather of a

city stormed and sacked, than of a Roman camp, that of Germanicus Caesar,

victorious and flourishing, awakened attention and inquiry in the soldiers:

leaving  their  tents,  they  cried,  "Whence  these  doleful  wailings?  what  so

lamentable! so many ladies of illustrious quality, travelling thus forlorn; not a

Centurion to attend them; not a soldier to guard them; their General's wife

amongst them, undistinguished by any mark of her princely dignity; destitute

of her ordinary train; frightened from the Roman legions, and repairing, like

an  exile,  for  shelter  to  Treves,  there  to  commit  herself  to  the  faith  offoreigners."  Hence  shame  and  commiseration  seized  them,  and  the

remembrance of her illustrious family, with that of her own virtues; the brave

Agrippa her father; the mighty Augustus her grandfather; the amiable Drusus

her father-in-law, herself celebrated for a fruitful bed, and of signal chastity:

add the consideration of her little son, born in the camp, nursed in the arms of

the legions, and by themselves named Caligula, a military name from the

boots which of the same fashion with their own, in compliment to them, and

to  win  their  affections,  he  frequently  wore.  But  nothing  so  effectually

subdued them as their own envy towards the inhabitants of Treves: hence

they all besought, all adjured, that she would return to themselves, and with

themselves remain: thus some stopped Agrippina; but the main body returned

with their entreaties to Germanicus, who, as he was yet in the transports of

grief and anger, addressed himself on this wise to the surrounding crowd.

 
"To  me  neither  is  my  wife  or  son  dearer  than  my  father  and  the

Commonwealth. But him doubtless the majesty of his name will defend; and

there are other armies, loyal armies, to defend the Roman State. As to my

wife and children, whom for your glory I could freely sacrifice, I now remove

them  from  your  rage;  that  by  my  blood  alone  may  be  expiated  whatever

further  mischief  your  fury  meditates;  and  that  the  murder  of  the  great

grandson of Augustus, the murder of the daughter-in-law of Tiberius, may

not be added to mine, nor to the blackness of your past guilt. For, during

these days of frenzy what has been too horrid for you to commit? What so

sacred that you have not violated? To this audience what name shall I give?

Can  I  call  you  soldiers?  you  who  have  beset  with  arms  the  son  of  your

Emperor, confined him in your trenches, and held him in a siege? Roman

citizens can I call you? you who have trampled upon the supreme authority of

the Roman Senate? Laws religiously observed by common enemies, you have

profaned; violated the sacred privileges, and persons of Ambassadors; broken

the laws of nations. The deified Julius Caesar quelled a sedition in his army

by a single word: he called all who refused to follow him, townsmen. The

deified Augustus, when, after the battle of Actium, the legions who won it

lapsed  into  mutiny,  terrified  them  into  submission  by  the  dignity  of  his

presence and an awful look. These, it is true, are mighty and immortal names,

whom I dare not emulate; but, as I am their descendant, and inherit their

blood, should the armies in Syria and Spain reject my orders, and contemn

my authority, I should think their behaviour strange and base: are not thepresent legions under stronger ties than those in Syria and Spain? You are the

first and the twentieth legions; the former enrolled by Tiberius himself; the

other his constant companions in so many battles, his partners in so many

victories, and by him enriched with so many bounties! Is this the worthy

return you make your Emperor, and late Commander, for the distinction he

has  shown  you,  for  the  favour  he  has  done  you,  and  for  his  liberalities

towards you? And shall I be the author of such tidings to him; such heavy

tidings  in  the  midst  of  congratulations  and  happy  accounts  from  every

province in the Empire? Must it be my sad task to acquaint him that his own

new levies, as well as his own veterans who long fought under him; these not

appeased by their discharge, and neither of them satiated with the money

given them, are both still combined in a furious mutiny? must I tell him that

here and only here the Centurions are butchered, the Tribunes driven away,

the Ambassadors imprisoned; that with blood the camp is stained, and the

rivers flow with blood; and that for me his son, I hold a precarious life at the

mercy of men, who owe me duty, and practise enmity?

 
"Why did you the other day, oh unseasonable and too officious friends! why

did you leave me at their mercy by snatching from me my sword, when with

it I would have put myself out of their power? He who offered me his own

sword showed greater kindness, and was more my friend. I would then have

fallen happy; happy that my death would have hid from mine eyes so many

horrible crimes since committed by my own army; and for you, you would

have chosen another general, such a general, no doubt, as would have left my

death unpunished, but still one who would have sought vengeance for that of

Varus and the three legions; for the Gods are too just to permit that ever the

Belgians, however generously they offer their service, shall reap the credit

and renown of retrieving the glory of the Roman name, and of reducing in

behalf of Rome the German nations her foes. Filled with this passion for the

glory  of  Rome,  I  here  invoke  thy  spirit  now  with  the  Gods,  oh  deified

Augustus; and thy image interwoven in the ensigns, and thy memory, oh

deceased father. Let thy revered spirit, oh Augustus, let thy loved image and

memory,  oh  Drusus,  still  dear  to  these  legions,  vindicate  them  from  this

guilty stain, this foul infamy of leaving to foreigners the honour of defending

and  avenging  the  Roman  State.  They  are  Romans;  they  already  feel  the

remorses  of  shame;  they  are  already  stimulated  with  a  sense  of  honour:

improve, oh improve this generous disposition in them; that thus inspiredthey may turn the whole tide of their civil rage to the destruction of their

common enemy. And for you, my fellow-soldiers, in whom I behold all the

marks of compunction, other countenances, and minds happily changed; if

you mean to restore to the Senate its ambassadors; to your Emperor your

sworn  obedience;  to  me,  your  general,  my  wife  and  son;  be  it  the  first

instance  of  your  duty,  to  fly  the  contagious  company  of  incendiaries,  to

separate the sober from the seditious: this will be a faithful sign of remorse,

this a firm pledge of fidelity."

 
These  words  softened  them  into  supplicants:  they  confessed  that  all  his

reproaches were true; they besought him to punish the guilty and malicious,

to pardon the weak and misled, and to lead them against the enemy; to recall

his wife, to bring back his son, nor to suffer the fosterling of the legions to be

given in hostage to the Gauls. Against the recalling of Agrippina he alleged

the advance of winter, and her approaching delivery; but said, that his son

should return, and that to themselves he left to execute what remained further

to be executed. Instantly, with changed resentments, they ran, and seizing the

most seditious, dragged them in bonds to Caius Cretonius, commander of the

first legion, who judged and punished them in this manner. The legions, with

their swords drawn, surrounded the tribunal; from thence the prisoner was by

a  Tribune  exposed  to  their  view,  and  if  they  proclaimed  him  guilty,  cast

headlong down, and executed even by his fellow-soldiers, who rejoiced in the

execution, because by it they thought their own guilt to be expiated: nor did

Germanicus  restrain  them,  since  on  themselves  remained  the  cruelty  and

reproach of the slaughter committed without any order of his. The veterans

followed the same example of vengeance, and were soon after ordered into

Rhetia, in appearance to defend that province against the invading Suevians;

in reality, to remove them from a camp still horrible to their sight, as well in

the remedy and punishment, as from the memory of their crime. Germanicus

next passed a scrutiny upon the conduct and characters of the Centurions:

before him they were cited singly; and each gave an account of his name, his

company, country, the length of his service, exploits in war, and military

presents, if with any he had been distinguished: if the Tribunes or his legion

bore  testimony  of  his  diligence  and  integrity,  he  kept  his  post;  upon

concurring complaint of his avarice or cruelty, he was degraded.

 
Thus  were  the  present  commotions  appeased;  but  others  as  great  still

subsisted, from the rage and obstinacy of the fifth and twenty-first legions.They were in winter quarters sixty miles off, in a place called the Old Camp,

[Footnote:  Xanten.]  and  had  first  began  the  sedition:  nor  was  there  any

wickedness so horrid, that they had not perpetrated; nay, at this time, neither

terrified by the punishment, nor reclaimed by the reformation of their fellow-

soldiers, they persevered in their fury. Germanicus therefore determined to

give them battle, if they persisted in their revolt; and prepared vessels, arms,

and troops to be sent down the Rhine.

 
Before the issue of the sedition in Illyricum was known at Rome, tidings of

the uproar in the German legions arrived; hence the city was filled with much

terror; and hence against Tiberius many complaints, "that while with feigned

consultations and delays he mocked the Senate and people, once the great

bodies of the estate, but now bereft of power and armies, the soldiery were in

open rebellion, one too mighty and stubborn to be quelled by two princes so

young in years and authority: he ought at first to have gone himself, and awed

them  with  the  majesty  of  imperial  power,  as  doubtless  they  would  have

returned to duty upon the sight of their Emperor, a Prince of consummate

experience, the sovereign disposer of rewards and severity. Did Augustus,

even under the pressure of old age and infirmities, take so many journeys into

Germany? and should Tiberius, in the vigour of his life, when the same or

greater occasions called him thither, sit lazily in the Senate to watch senators

and  cavil  at  words?  He  had  fully  provided  for  the  domestic  servitude  of

Rome; he ought next to cure the licentiousness of the soldiers, to restrain

their turbulent spirits, and reconcile them to a life of peace."

 
But  all  these  reasonings  and  reproaches  moved  not  Tiberius:  he  was

determined not to depart from the capital, the centre of power and affairs; nor

to chance or peril expose his person and empire. In truth, many and contrary

difficulties pressed and perplexed him: "the German army was the stronger;

that of Pannonia nearer; the power of both the Gauls supported the former;

the latter was at the gates of Italy. Now to which should he repair first? and

would not the last visited be inflamed by being postponed? But by sending

one of his sons to each, the equal treatment of both was maintained; as also

the majesty of the supreme power, which from distance ever derived most

reverence. Besides, the young princes would be excused, if to their father

they referred such demands as were for them improper to grant; and if they

disobeyed Germanicus and Drusus, his own authority remained to appease or

punish them: but if once they had contemned their Emperor himself, whatother resource was behind?" However, as if he had been upon the point of

marching, he chose his attendance, provided his equipage, and prepared a

fleet:  but  by  various  delays  and  pretences,  sometimes  that  of  the  winter,

sometimes business, he deceived for a time even the wisest men; much longer

the common people, and the provinces for a great while.

 
Germanicus had already drawn together his army, and was prepared to take

vengeance on the seditious: but judging it proper to allow space for trial,

whether they would follow the late example, and consulting their own safety

do  justice  upon  one  another,  he  sent  letters  to  Caecina,  "that  he  himself

approached,  with  a  powerful  force;  and  if  they  prevented  him  not,  by

executing the guilty, he would put all indifferently to the slaughter." These

letters Caecina privately read to the principal officers, and such of the camp

as the sedition had not tainted; besought them "to redeem themselves from

death, and all from infamy; urged that in peace alone reason was heard and

merit distinguished; but in the rage of war the blind steel spared the innocent

no more than the guilty." The officers, having tried those they believed for

their purpose, and found the majority still to persevere in their duty, did, in

concurrence with the General, settle the time for falling with the sword upon

the most notoriously guilty and turbulent. Upon a particular signal given they

rushed  into  their  tents  and  butchered  them,  void  as  they  were  of  all

apprehension; nor did any but the centurions and executioners know whence

the massacre began, or where it would end.

 
This had a different face from all the civil slaughters that ever happened: it

was a slaughter not of enemies upon enemies, nor from different and opposite

camps, nor in a day of battle; but of comrades upon comrades, in the same

tents where they ate together by day, where they slept together by night.

From  this  state  of  intimacy  they  flew  into  mortal  enmity,  and  friends

launched their darts at friends: wounds, outcries, and blood were open to

view; but the cause remained hid: wild chance governed the rest, and several

innocents were slain. For the criminals, when they found against whom all

this fury was bent, had also betaken themselves to their arms; neither did

Caecina,  nor  any  of  the  Tribunes,  intervene  to  stay  the  rage;  so  that  the

soldiers had full permission to vengeance, and a licentious satiety of killing.

Germanicus soon after entered the camp now full of blood and carcasses, and

lamenting  with  many  tears  that  "this  was  not  a  remedy,  but  cruelty  and

desolation,"  commanded  the  bodies  to  be  burnt.  Their  minds,  stilltempestuous and bloody, were transported with sudden eagerness to attack

the  foe,  as  the  best  expiation  of  their  tragical  fury:  nor  otherwise,  they

thought, could the ghosts of their butchered brethren be appeased, than by

receiving in their own profane breasts a chastisement of honourable wounds.

Germanicus fell in with the ardour of the soldiers, and laying a bridge upon

the  Rhine,  marched  over  twelve  thousand  legionary  soldiers,  twenty-six

cohorts of the allies, and eight regiments of horse; men all untainted in the

late sedition.

 
The Germans rejoiced, not far off, at this vacation of war, occasioned first by

the death of Augustus, and afterwards by intestine tumults in the camp; but

the  Romans  by  a  hasty  march  passed  through  the  Caesian  woods,  and

levelling the barrier formerly begun by Tiberius, upon it pitched their camp.

In the front and rear they were defended by a palisade; on each side by a

barricade of the trunks of trees felled. From thence, beginning to traverse

gloomy  forests,  they  stopped  to  consult  which  of  two  ways  they  should

choose,  the  short  and  frequented,  or  the  longest  and  least  known,  and

therefore  unsuspected  by  the  foe:  the  longest  way  was  chosen;  but  in

everything else despatch was observed; for by the scouts intelligence was

brought that the Germans did, that night, celebrate a festival with great mirth

and revelling. Hence Caecina was commanded to advance with the cohorts

without their baggage, and to clear a passage through the forest: at a moderate

distance followed the legions; the clearness of the night facilitated the march,

and  they  arrived  at  the  villages  of  the  Marsians,  which  with  guards  they

presently invested. The Germans were even yet under the effects of their

debauch, scattered here and there, some in bed, some lying by their tables; no

watch  placed,  no  apprehension  of  an  enemy.  So  utterly  had  their  false

security banished all order and care; and they were under no dread of war,

without  enjoying  peace,  other  than  the  deceitful  and  lethargic  peace  of

drunkards.

 
The legions were eager for revenge; and Germanicus, to extend their ravage,

divided them into four battalions. The country was wasted by fire and sword

fifty miles round; nor sex nor age found mercy; places sacred and profane

had the equal lot of destruction, all razed to the ground, and with them the

temple of Tanfana, of all others the most celebrated amongst these nations:

nor did all this execution cost the soldiers a wound, while they only slew men

half asleep, disarmed, or dispersed. This slaughter roused the Bructerans, theTubantes, and the Usipetes; and they beset the passes of the forest, through

which  the  army  was  to  return:  an  event  known  to  Germanicus,  and  he

marched in order of battle. The auxiliary cohorts and part of the horse led the

van, followed close by the first legion; the baggage was in the middle; the

twenty-first legion closed the left wing, and the fifth the right; the twentieth

defended  the  rear;  and  after  them  marched  the  rest  of  the  allies.  But  the

enemy stirred not, till the body of the army entered the wood: they then began

lightly to insult the front and wings; and at last, with their whole force, fell

upon the rear. The light cohorts were already disordered by the close German

bands, when Germanicus riding up to the twentieth legion, and exalting his

voice, "This was the season," he cried, "to obliterate the scandal of sedition:

hence they should fall resolutely on, and into sudden praise convert their late

shame and offence." These words inflamed them: at one charge they broke

the enemy, drove them out of the wood, and slaughtered them in the plain. In

the meanwhile, the front passed the forest, and fortified the camp: the rest of

the march was uninterrupted; and the soldiers, trusting to the merit of their

late exploits, and forgetting at once past faults and terrors, were placed in

winter quarters.

 
The tidings of these exploits affected Tiberius with gladness and anguish: he

rejoiced  that  the  sedition  was  suppressed;  but  that  Germanicus  had,  by

discharging the veterans, by shortening the term of service to the rest, and by

largesses to all, gained the hearts of the army, as well as earned high glory in

war, proved to the Emperor matter of torture. To the Senate, however, he

reported the detail of his feats, and upon his valour bestowed copious praises,

but in words too pompous and ornamental to be believed dictated by his

heart. It was with more brevity that he commended Drusus, and his address in

quelling the sedition of Illyricum, but more cordially withal, and in language

altogether sincere; and even to the Pannonian legions he extended all the

concessions made by Germanicus to his own.

 
There  was  this  year  an  admission  of  new  rites,  by  the  establishment  of

another College of Priests, one sacred to the deity of Augustus; as formerly

Titus Tatius, to preserve the religious rites of the Sabines, had founded the

fraternity  of  Titian  Priests.  To  fill  the  society,  one-and-  twenty,  the  most

considerable Romans were drawn by lot, and to them added Tiberius, Drusus,

Claudius, and Germanicus. The games in honour of Augustus began then first

to be embroiled by emulation among the players, and the strife of parties intheir  behalf.  Augustus  had  countenanced  these  players  and  their  art,  in

complaisance  to  Maecenas,  who  was  mad  in  love  with  Bathyllus  the

comedian;  nor  to  such  favourite  amusements  of  the  populace  had  he  any

aversion himself; he rather judged it an acceptable courtesy to mingle with

the multitude in these their popular pleasures. Different was the temper of

Tiberius, different his politics: to severer manners, however, he durst not yet

reduce the people, so many years indulged in licentious gaieties.

 
In  the  consulship  of  Drusus  Caesar  and  Caius  Norbanus,  a  triumph  was

decreed to Germanicus, while the war still subsisted. He was preparing with

all diligence to prosecute it the following summer; but began much sooner by

a sudden irruption early in the spring into the territories of the Cattans: an

anticipation of the campaign, which proceeded from the hopes given him of

dissension amongst the enemy, caused by the opposite parties of Arminius

and  Segestes;  two  men  signally  known  to  the  Romans  upon  different

accounts; the last for his firm faith, the first for faith violated. Arminius was

the  incendiary  of  Germany;  but  by  Segestes  had  been  given  repeated

warnings of an intended revolt, particularly during the festival immediately

preceding the insurrection: he had even advised Varus "to secure himself and

Arminius, and all the other chiefs; for that the multitude, thus bereft of their

leaders, would dare to attempt nothing; and Varus have time to distinguish

crimes and such as committed none." But by his own fate, and the sudden

violence  of  Arminius,  Varus  fell.  Segestes,  though  by  the  weight  and

unanimity of his nation he was forced into the war, yet remained at constant

variance  with  Arminius:  a  domestic  quarrel  too  heightened  their  hate,  as

Arminius had carried away the daughter of Segestes, already betrothed to

another;  and  the  same  relations,  which  amongst  friends  prove  bonds  of

tenderness,  were  fresh  stimulations  of  wrath  to  an  obnoxious  son  and  an

offended father.

 
Upon  these  encouragements,  Germanicus  to  the  command  of  Caecina

committed  four  legions,  five  thousand  auxiliaries,  and  some  bands  of

Germans, dwellers on this side the Rhine, drawn suddenly together; he led

himself as many legions with double the number of allies, and erecting a fort

in Mount Taunus, [Footnote: Near Homburg.] upon the old foundations of

one raised by his father, rushed full march against the Cattans; having behind

him left Lucius Apronius, to secure the ways from the fury of inundations:

for  as  the  roads  were  then  dry  and  the  rivers  low,  events  in  that  climateexceeding rare, he had without check expedited his march; but against his

return apprehended the violence of rains and floods. Upon the Cattans he fell

with such surprise, that all the weak through sex or age were instantly taken

or slaughtered: their youth, by swimming over the Adrana, [Footnote: Eder.]

escaped, and attempted to force the Romans from building a bridge to follow

them, but by dint of arrows and engines were repulsed; and then, having in

vain tried to gain terms of peace, some submitted to Germanicus; the rest

abandoned  their  villages  and  dwellings,  and  dispersed  themselves  in  the

woods.  Mattium,  [Footnote:  Maden.]  the  capital  of  the  nation,  he  burnt,

ravaged all the open country, and bent his march to the Rhine; nor durst the

enemy harass his rear, an usual practice of theirs, when sometimes they fly

more through craft than affright. The Cheruscans indeed were addicted to

assist the Cattans, but terrified from attempting it by Caecina, who moved

about with his forces from place to place; and by routing the Marsians who

had dared to engage him, restrained all their efforts.

 
Soon  after  arrived  deputies  from  Segestes,  praying  relief  against  the

combination and violence of his countrymen, by whom he was held besieged;

as more powerful amongst them than his was the credit of Arminius, since it

was he who had advised the war. The genius this of barbarians, to judge that

men  are  to  be  trusted  in  proportion  as  they  are  fierce,  and  in  public

commotions ever to prefer the most resolute. To the other deputies Segestes

had added Segimundus, his son; but the young man faltered a while, as his

own heart accused him; for that the year when Germany revolted, he, who

had been by the Romans created Priest of the altar of the Ubians, rent the

sacerdotal  tiara  and  fled  to  the  revolters:  yet,  encouraged  by  the  Roman

clemency,  he  undertook  the  execution  of  his  father's  orders,  was  himself

graciously received, and then conducted with a guard to the frontiers of Gaul.

Germanicus led back his army to the relief of Segestes, and was rewarded

with success. He fought the besiegers, and rescued him with a great train of

his relations and followers; amongst them too were ladies of illustrious rank,

particularly  the  wife  of  Arminius,  the  same  who  was  the  daughter  of

Segestes: a lady more of the spirit of her husband than that of her father; a

spirit so unsubdued, that from her eyes captivity forced not a tear, nor from

her lips a breath in the style of a supplicant: not a motion of her hands, nor a

look escaped her; but, fast across her breast she held her arms, and upon her

heavy womb her eyes were immovably fixed. There were likewise carriedRoman spoils taken at the slaughter of Varus and his army, and then divided

as prey amongst many of those who were now prisoners: at the same time

appeared Segestes, of superior stature; and from a confidence in his good

understanding with the Romans, undaunted. In this manner he spoke:

 
"It is not the first day this, that to the Roman People I have approved my faith

and adherence: from the moment I was by the deified Augustus presented

with the freedom of the city, I have continued by your interest to choose my

friends, by your interest to denominate my enemies; from no hate of mine to

my native country (for odious are traitors even to the party they embrace), but

because  the  same  measures  were  equally  conducing  to  the  benefit  of  the

Romans and of the Germans; and I was rather for peace than war. For this

reason  to  Varus,  the  then  General,  I  applied,  with  an  accusation  against

Arminius, who from me had ravished my daughter, and with you violated the

faith of leagues: but growing impatient with the slowness and inactivity of

Varus, and well apprised how little security was to be hoped from the laws, I

pressed him to seize myself, and Arminius, and his accomplices: witness that

fatal  night,  to  me  I  wish  it  had  been  the  last!  more  to  be  lamented  than

defended are the sad events which followed. I moreover cast Arminius into

irons, and was myself cast into irons by his faction; and as soon as to you,

Caesar, I could apply, you see I prefer old engagements to present violence,

and  tranquillity  to  combustions,  with  no  view  of  my  own  to  interest  or

reward,  but  to  banish  from  me  the  imputation  of  perfidiousness.  For  the

German nation, too, I would thus become a mediator, if peradventure they

will choose rather to repent than be destroyed: for my son, I intreat you, have

mercy upon his youth, and pardon his error; that my daughter is your prisoner

by force I own: in your breast it wholly lies under which character you will

treat her, whether as one by Arminius impregnated, or by me begotten." The

answer of Germanicus was gracious: he promised indemnity to his children

and kindred, and to himself a safe retreat in one of the old provinces; then

returned with his army, and by the direction of Tiberius, received the title of

Imperator. The wife of Arminius brought forth a male child, and the boy was

brought  up  at  Ravenna;  his  unhappy  conflicts  afterwards,  with  the

contumelious insults of fortune, will be remembered in their place.

 
The desertion of Segestes being divulged, with his gracious reception from

Germanicus,  affected  his  countrymen  variously;  with  hope  or  anguish,  as

they  were  prone  or  averse  to  the  war.  Naturally  violent  was  the  spirit  ofArminius, and now, by the captivity of his wife, by the fate of his child

doomed to bondage though yet unborn, enraged even to distraction: he flew

about amongst the Cheruscans, calling them to arms; to arm against Segestes,

to arm against Germanicus. Invectives followed his fury; "A blessed father

this  Segestes,"  he  cried!  "a  mighty  general  this  Germanicus!  invincible

warriors these Romans! so many troops have made prisoner of a woman. It is

not thus that I conquer; before me three legions fell, and three lieutenant-

generals. Open and honourable is my method of war, nor waged with big-

bellied  women,  but  against  men  and  arms;  and  treason  is  none  of  my

weapons. Still to be seen are the Roman standards in the German groves,

there by me hung up and devoted to our country Gods. Let Segestes live a

slave in a conquered province; let him to his son recover a foreign priesthood:

with the German nations he can never obliterate his reproach, that through

him  they  have  seen  between  the  Elbe  and  Rhine  rods  and  axes,  and  the

Roman  toga.  To  other  nations  who  know  not  the  Roman  domination,

executions and tributes are also unknown; evils which we too have cast off,

in spite of that Augustus now dead and enrolled with the Deities; in spite too

of Tiberius, his chosen successor: let us not after this dread a mutinous army,

and a boy without experience, their commander; but if you love your country,

your  kindred,  your  ancient  liberty  and  laws,  better  than  tyrants  and  new

colonies, let Arminius rather lead you to liberty and glory, than the wicked

Segestes to the infamy of bondage."

 
By  these  stimulations,  not  the  Cheruscans  only  were  roused,  but  all  the

neighbouring  nations;  and  into  the  confederacy  was  drawn  Inguiomerus,

paternal uncle to Arminius, a man long since in high credit with the Romans:

hence a new source of fear to Germanicus, who, to avoid the shock of their

whole  forces,  and  to  divert  the  enemy,  sent  Caecina  with  forty  Roman

cohorts to the river Amisia, [Footnote: Ems.] through the territories of the

Bructerans. Pedo the Prefect led the cavalry by the confines of the Frisians:

he himself, on the lake, [Footnote: The Zuyder Zee.] embarked four legions;

and upon the bank of the said river the whole body met, foot, horse, and fleet.

The Chaucians, upon offering their assistance, were taken into the service;

but the Bructerans, setting fire to their effects and dwellings, were routed by

Stertinius,  by  Germanicus  despatched  against  them  with  a  band  lightly

armed. As this party were engaged between slaughter and plunder, he found

the Eagle of the nineteenth legion lost in the overthrow of Varus. The armymarched next to the farthest borders of the Bructerans, and the whole country

between the rivers Amisia and Luppia [Footnote: Lippe.] was laid waste. Not

far hence lay the forest of Teutoburgium, and in it the bones of Varus and the

legions, by report still unburied.

 
Hence Germanicus became inspired with a tender passion to pay the last

offices to the legions and their leader; the like tenderness also affected the

whole army. They were moved with compassion, some for the fate of their

friends, others for that of their relations here tragically slain; they were struck

with the doleful casualties of war, and the sad lot of humanity. Caecina was

sent before to examine the gloomy recesses of the forest; to lay bridges over

the pools; and upon the deceitful marshes, causeways. The army entered the

doleful  solitude,  hideous  to  sight,  hideous  to  memory.  First  they  saw  the

camp of Varus, wide in circumference; and the three distinct spaces, allotted

to  the  different  Eagles,  showed  the  number  of  the  legions.  Further,  they

beheld  the  ruinous  entrenchment,  and  the  ditch  nigh  choked  up:  in  it  the

remains of the army were supposed to have made their last effort, and in it to

have found their graves. In the open fields lay their bones all bleached and

bare, some separate, some on heaps; just as they had happened to fall, flying

for  their  lives,  or  resisting  unto  death.  Here  were  scattered  the  limbs  of

horses, there pieces of broken javelins; and the trunks of trees bore the skulls

of men. In the adjacent groves were the savage altars; where, of the tribunes

and  principal  centurions,  the  barbarians  had  made  a  horrible  immolation.

Those who survived the slaughter, having escaped from captivity and the

sword, related the sad particulars to the rest: "Here the commanders of the

legions were slain; there we lost the Eagles; here Varus had his first wound;

there he gave himself another, and perished by his own unhappy hand. In that

place, too, stood the tribunal whence Arminius harangued; in this quarter, for

the  execution  of  his  captives,  he  erected  so  many  gibbets;  in  that  such  a

number of funeral trenches were digged; and with these circumstances of

pride and despite he insulted the ensigns and Eagles."

 
Thus the Roman army buried the bones of the three legions, six years after

the  slaughter:  nor  could  any  one  distinguish  whether  he  gathered  the

particular remains of a stranger, or those of a kinsman; but all considered the

whole  as  their  friends,  the  whole  as  their  relations;  with  heightened

resentments against the foe, at once sad and revengeful. In this pious office,

so acceptable to the dead, Germanicus was a partner in the woe of the living;and upon the common tomb laid the first sod: a proceeding not liked by

Tiberius; whether it were that upon every action of Germanicus he put a

perverse meaning, or believed that the affecting spectacle of the unburied

slain would sink the spirit of the army, and heighten their terror of the enemy;

as also that "a general vested, as Augur, with the intendency of religious rites,

became defiled by touching the solemnities of the dead."

 
Arminius,  retiring  into  desert  and  pathless  places,  was  pursued  by

Germanicus;  who,  as  soon  as  he  reached  him,  commanded  the  horse  to

advance,  and  dislodge  the  enemy  from  the  post  they  had  possessed.

Arminius, having directed his men to keep close together, and draw near to

the woods, wheeled suddenly about, and to those whom he had hid in the

forest gave the signal to rush out: the Roman horse, now engaged by a new

army,  became  disordered,  and  to  their  relief  some  cohorts  were  sent,  but

likewise  broken  by  the  press  of  those  that  fled;  and  great  was  the

consternation so many ways increased. The enemy too were already pushing

them  into  the  morass,  a  place  well  known  to  the  pursuers,  as  to  the

unapprised Romans it had proved pernicious, had not Germanicus drawn out

the legions in order of battle. Hence the enemy became terrified, our men

reassured,  and  both  retired  with  equal  loss  and  advantage.  Germanicus

presently after returning with the army to the river Amisia, reconducted the

legions, as he had brought them, in the fleet: part of the horse were ordered to

march along the sea-shore to the Rhine. Caecina, who led his own men, was

warned, that though he was to return through unknown roads, yet he should

with all speed pass the causeway called the long bridges: it is a narrow track

this, between vast marshes, and formerly raised by Lucius Domitius. The

marshes themselves are of an uncertain soil, here full of mud, there of heavy

sticking  clay,  or  traversed  with  various  currents.  Round  about  are  woods

which rise gently from the plain, and were already filled with soldiers by

Arminius;  who,  by  shorter  ways  and  a  running  march,  had  arrived  there

before our men, who were loaded with arms and baggage. Caecina, who was

perplexed how at once to repair the causeway decayed by time, and to repulse

the  foe,  resolved  at  last  to  encamp  in  the  place,  that  whilst  some  were

employed in the work, others might maintain the fight.

 
The Barbarians strove violently to break our station, and to fall upon the

entrenchers:  they  harassed  our  men,  assaulted  the  works,  changed  their

attacks, and pushed everywhere. With the shouts of the assailants, the cries ofthe  workmen  were  confusedly  mixed;  and  all  things  equally  combined  to

distress the Romans: the place deep with ooze sinking under those who stood,

slippery to such as advanced; their armour heavy; the waters deep, nor could

they in them launch their javelins. The Cheruscans, on the contrary, were

inured to encounters in the bogs; their persons tall, their spears long, such as

could wound at a distance. At last the legions, already yielding, were by night

redeemed from an unequal combat; but night interrupted not the activity of

the  Germans,  become  by  success  indefatigable.  Without  refreshing

themselves with sleep, they diverted all the courses of the springs which rise

in  the  neighbouring  mountains,  and  turned  them  into  the  plains:  thus  the

Roman camp was flooded, the work, as far as they had carried it, overturned,

and the labour of the poor soldiers renewed and doubled. To Caecina this

year proved the fortieth of his sustaining as officer or soldier the functions of

arms; a man in all the vicissitudes of war, prosperous or disastrous, well

experienced  and  thence  undaunted.  Weighing,  therefore,  with  himself  all

probable  events  and  expedients,  he  could  devise  no  other  than  that  of

restraining the enemy to the woods, till he had sent forward the wounded men

and baggage; for, from the mountains to the marshes there stretched a plain

fit only to hold a little army: to this purpose the legions were thus appointed;

the fifth had the right wing, and the one-and-twentieth the left; the first led

the van; the twentieth defended the rear.

 
A restless night it was to both armies, but in different ways; the Barbarians

feasted  and  caroused,  and  with  songs  of  triumph,  or  with  horrid  and

threatening  cries,  filled  all  the  plain  and  echoing  woods.  Amongst  the

Romans were feeble fires, sad silence, or broken words; they leaned drooping

here and there against the pales, or wandered disconsolately about the tents,

like men without sleep, but not quite awake. A frightful dream too terrified

the General; he thought he heard and saw Quinctilius Varus, rising out of the

marsh all besmeared with blood, stretching forth his hand, and calling upon

him; but that he rejected the call and pushed him away. At break of day, the

legions posted on the wings, through contumacy or affright, deserted their

stations, and took sudden possession of a field beyond the bogs. Neither did

Arminius fall straight upon them, however open they lay to his assault; but,

when  he  perceived  the  baggage  set  fast  in  mire  and  ditches,  the  soldiers

above it disorderly and embarrassed, the ranks and ensigns in confusion, and,

as usual in a time of distress, every one in haste to save himself, but slow toobey his officer, he then commanded his Germans to break in, "Behold," he

vehemently cried; "behold again Varus and his legions subdued by the same

fate." Thus he cried, and instantly with a select body broke quite through our

forces, and chiefly against the horse directed his havoc; so that the ground

becoming slippery by their blood and the slime of the marsh, their feet flew

from them, and they cast their riders; then galloping and stumbling amongst

the ranks, they overthrew all they met, and trod to death all they overthrew.

The greatest difficulty was to maintain the Eagles; a storm of darts made it

impossible to advance them, and the rotten ground impossible to fix them.

Caecina, while he sustained the fight, had his horse shot, and having fallen

was nigh taken; but the first legion saved him. Our relief came from the

greediness of the enemy, who ceased slaying to seize the spoil: hence the

legions had respite to struggle into the fair field and firm ground. Nor was

here an end of their miseries: a palisade was to be raised, an entrenchment

digged; their instruments too for throwing up and carrying earth, and their

tools  for  cutting  turf,  were  almost  all  lost;  no  tents  for  the  soldiers;  no

remedies for the wounded; and their food all defiled with mire or blood. As

they shared it in sadness amongst them, they lamented that mournful night,

they lamented the approaching day, to so many thousand men the last.

 
It happened that a horse, which had broke his collar as he strayed about,

became frightened with noise, and ran over some that were in his way: this

raised such a consternation in the camp, from a persuasion that the Germans

in a body had forced an entrance, that all rushed to the gates, especially to the

postern, as the farthest from the foe, and safer for flight. Caecina having

found  the  vanity  of  their  dread,  but  unable  to  stop  them,  either  by  his

authority, or by his prayers, or indeed by force, flung himself at last across

the gate. This prevailed; their awe and tenderness of their General restrained

them from running over his body; and the Tribunes and Centurions satisfied

them the while, that it was a false alarm.

 
Then calling them together, and desiring them to hear him with silence, he

reminded them of their difficulties, and how to conquer them: "That for their

lives they must be indebted to their arms, but force was to be tempered with

art; they must therefore keep close within their camp, till the enemy, in hopes

of taking it by storm, advanced; then make a sudden sally on every side, and

by this push they should break through the enemy, and reach the Rhine. But

if they fled, more forests remained to be traversed, deeper marshes to bepassed, and the cruelty of a pursuing foe to be sustained." He laid before

them the motives and fruits of victory, public rewards and glory, with every

tender  domestic  consideration,  as  well  as  those  of  military  exploits  and

praise. Of their dangers and sufferings he said nothing. He next distributed

horses, first his own, then those of the Tribunes and leaders of the legions, to

the  bravest  soldiers  impartially;  that  thus  mounted  they  might  begin  the

charge, followed by the foot.

 
Amongst the Germans there was not less agitation, from hopes of victory,

greediness  of  spoil,  and  the  opposite  counsels  of  their  leaders.  Arminius

proposed "to let the Romans march off, and to beset them in their march,

when  engaged  in  bogs  and  fastnesses."  The  advice  of  Inguiomerus  was

fiercer,  and  thence  by  the  Barbarians  more  applauded:  he  declared  "for

forcing the camp, for that the victory would be quick, there would be more

captives, and entire plunder." As soon, therefore, as it was light, they rushed

out upon the camp, cast hurdles into the ditch, attacked and grappled the

palisade. Upon it few soldiers appeared, and these seemed frozen with fear;

but as the enemy was in swarms, climbing the ramparts, the signal was given

to the cohorts; the cornets and trumpets sounded, and instantly, with shouts

and  impetuosity,  they  issued  out  and  begirt  the  assailants.  "Here  are  no

thickets," they scornfully cried; "no bogs; but an equal field and impartial

Gods." The enemy, who imagined few Romans remaining, fewer arms, and

an easy conquest, were struck with the sounding trumpets, with the glittering

armour; and every object of terror appeared double to them who expected

none. They fell like men who, as they are void of moderation in prosperity,

are also destitute of conduct in distress. Arminius forsook the fight unhurt;

Inguiomerus grievously wounded; their men were slaughtered as long as day

and rage lasted. In the evening the legions returned, in the same want of

provisions,  and  with  more  wounds;  but  in  victory  they  found  all  things,

health, vigour, and abundance.

 
In the meantime a report had flown, that the Roman forces were routed, and

an army of Germans upon full march to invade Gaul; so that under the terror

of this news there were those whose cowardice would have emboldened them

to have demolished the bridge upon the Rhine, had not Agrippina restrained

them from that infamous attempt. In truth, such was the undaunted spirit of

the woman, that at this time she performed all the duties of a general, relieved

the necessitous soldiers, upon the wounded bestowed medicines, and uponothers clothes. Caius Plinius, the writer of the German wars, relates that she

stood at the end of the bridge, as the legions returned, and accosted them with

thanks and praises; a behaviour which sunk deep into the spirit of Tiberius:

"For that all this officiousness of hers," he thought, "could not be upright; nor

that it was against foreigners only she engaged the army. To the direction of

the generals nothing was now left, when a woman reviewed the companies,

attended the Eagles, and to the men distributed largesses: as if before she had

shown but small tokens of ambitious designs, in carrying her child (the son of

the  General)  in  a  soldier's  coat  about  the  camp,  with  the  title  of  Caesar

Caligula:  already  in  greater  credit  with  the  army  was  Agrippina  than  the

leaders  of  the  legions,  in  greater  than  their  generals;  and  a  woman  had

suppressed  sedition,  which  the  authority  of  the  Emperor  was  not  able  to

restrain." These jealousies were inflamed, and more were added, by Sejanus;

one who was well skilled in the temper of Tiberius, and purposely furnished

him with sources of hatred, to lie hid in his heart, and be discharged with

increase hereafter. Germanicus, in order to lighten the ships in which he had

embarked his men, and fit their burden to the ebbs and shallows, delivered

the second and fourteenth legions to Publius Vitellius, to lead them by land.

Vitellius at first had an easy march on dry ground, or ground moderately

overflowed by the tide, when suddenly the fury of the north wind swelling

the ocean (a constant effect of the equinox) the legions were surrounded and

tossed with the tide, and the land was all on flood; the sea, the shore, the

fields,  had  the  same  tempestuous  face;  no  distinction  of  depths  from

shallows; none of firm, from deceitful, footing. They were overturned by the

billows, swallowed down by the eddies; and horses, baggage, and drowned

men encountered each other, and floated together. The several companies

were mixed at random by the waves; they waded, now breast high, now up to

the chin, and as the ground failed them, they fell, some never more to rise.

Their  cries  and  mutual  encouragements  availed  them  nothing  against  the

prevailing and inexorable waves; no difference between the coward and the

brave, the wise and the foolish; none between circumspection and chance; but

all were equally involved in the invincible violence of the flood. Vitellius, at

length struggling on to an eminence, drew the legions thither, where they

passed the cold night without fire, and destitute of every convenience; most

of them naked or lamed; not less miserable than men enclosed by an enemy;

for even to such remained the consolation of an honourable death; but here

was destruction every way void of glory. The land returned with the day, andthey marched to the river Vidrus, [Footnote: Weser.] whither Germanicus had

gone with the fleet. There the two legions were again embarked, when fame

had given them for drowned; nor was their escape believed till Germanicus

and the army were seen to return.

 
Stertinius, who in the meanwhile had been sent before to receive Sigimerus,

the brother of Segestes (a prince willing to surrender himself) brought him

and his son to the city of the Ubians. Both were pardoned; the father freely,

the son with more difficulty, because he was said to have insulted the corpse

of Varus. For the rest, Spain, Italy, and both the Gauls strove with emulation

to supply the losses of the army; and offered arms, horses, money, according

as each abounded. Germanicus applauded their zeal; but accepted only the

horses and arms for the service of the war. With his own money he relieved

the necessities of the soldiers: and to soften also by his kindness the memory

of the late havoc, he visited the wounded, extolled the exploits of particulars,

viewed their wounds, with hopes encouraged some, with a sense of glory

animated  others;  and  by  affability  and  tenderness  confirmed  them  all  in

devotion to himself and to his fortune in war.

 
The ornaments of triumph were this year decreed to Aulus Caecina, Lucius

Apronius, and Caius Silius, for their services under Germanicus. The title of

Father of his Country, so often offered by the people to Tiberius, was rejected

by him; nor would he permit swearing upon his acts, though the same was

voted by the Senate. Against it he urged "the instability of all mortal things,

and that the higher he was raised the more slippery he stood." But for all this

ostentation of a popular spirit, he acquired not the reputation of possessing it,

for he had revived the law concerning violated majesty; a law which, in the

days  of  our  ancestors,  had  indeed  the  same  name,  but  implied  different

arraignments and crimes, namely, those against the State; as when an army

was betrayed abroad, when seditions were raised at home; in short, when the

public was faithlessly administered and the majesty of the Roman People was

debased: these were actions, and actions were punished, but words were free.

Augustus was the first who brought libels under the penalties of this wrested

law, incensed as he was by the insolence of Cassius Severus, who had in his

writings wantonly defamed men and ladies of illustrious quality. Tiberius too

afterwards,  when  Pompeius  Macer,  the  Praetor,  consulted  him  "whether

process should be granted upon this law?" answered, "That the laws must be

executed." He also was exasperated by satirical verses written by unknownauthors and dispersed; exposing his cruelty, his pride, and his mind naturally

alienated from his mother.

 
It  will  be  worth  while  to  relate  here  the  pretended  crimes  charged  upon

Falanius and Rubrius, two Roman knights of small fortunes; that hence may

be seen from what beginnings, and by how much dark art of Tiberius, this

grievous mischief crept in; how it was again restrained; how at last it blazed

out and consumed all things. To Falanius was objected by his accusers, that

"amongst the adorers of Augustus, who went in fraternities from house to

house, he had admitted one Cassius, a mimic and prostitute; and having sold

his gardens, had likewise with them sold the statue of Augustus." The crime

imputed  to  Rubrius  was,  "That  he  had  sworn  falsely  by  the  divinity  of

Augustus." When these accusations were known to Tiberius, he wrote to the

consuls,  "That  Heaven  was  not  therefore  decreed  to  his  father,  that  the

worship of him might be a snare to the citizens of Rome; that Cassius, the

player,  was  wont  to  assist  with  others  of  his  profession  at  the  interludes

consecrated by his mother to the memory of Augustus: neither did it affect

religion, that his effigies, like other images of the Gods, were comprehended

in the sale of houses and gardens. As to the false swearing by his name, it

was to be deemed the same as if Rubrius had profaned the name of Jupiter;

but to the Gods belonged the avenging of injuries done to the Gods."

 
Not long after, Granius Marcellus, Praetor of Bithynia, was charged with

high  treason  by  his  own  Quaestor,  Cepio  Crispinus;  Romanus  Hispo,  the

pleader,  supporting  the  charge.  This  Cepio  began  a  course  of  life  which,

through the miseries of the times and the bold wickedness of men, became

afterwards famous: at first needy and obscure, but of a busy spirit, he made

court to the cruelty of the Prince by occult informations; and presently, as an

open accuser, grew terrible to every distinguished Roman. This procured him

credit with one, hatred from all, and made a precedent to be followed by

others, who from poverty became rich; from being contemned, dreadful; and

in the destruction which they brought upon others, found at last their own. He

accused Marcellus of "malignant words concerning Tiberius," an inevitable

crime!  when  the  accuser,  collecting  all  the  most  detestable  parts  of  the

Prince's  character,  alleged  them  as  the  expressions  of  the  accused;  for,

because they were true, they were believed to have been spoken. To this,

Hispo added, "That the statue of Marcellus was by him placed higher than

those of the Caesars; and that, having cut off the head of Augustus, he had inthe room of it set the head of Tiberius." This enraged him so, that breaking

silence, he cried, "He would himself, in this cause, give his vote explicitly

and under the tie of an oath." By this he meant to force the assent of the rest

of the Senate. There remained even then some faint traces of expiring liberty.

Hence Cneius Piso asked him, "In what place, Caesar, will you choose to

give your opinion? If first, I shall have your example to follow; if last, I fear I

may ignorantly dissent from you." The words pierced him, but he bore them,

the rather as he was ashamed of his unwary transport; and he suffered the

accused to be acquitted of high treason. To try him for the public money was

referred to the proper judges.

 
Nor sufficed it Tiberius to assist in the deliberations of the Senate only: he

likewise sat in the seats of justice; but always on one side, because he would

not  dispossess  the  Praetor  of  his  chair;  and  by  his  presence  there,  many

ordinances  were  established  against  the  intrigues  and  solicitations  of  the

Grandees. But while private justice was thus promoted, public liberty was

overthrown.  About  this  time,  Pius  Aurelius,  the  Senator,  whose  house,

yielding  to  the  pressure  of  the  public  road  and  aqueducts,  had  fallen,

complained to the Senate and prayed relief: a suit opposed by the Praetors

who managed the treasury; but he was relieved by Tiberius, who ordered him

the  price  of  his  house;  for  he  was  fond  of  being  liberal  upon  honest

occasions:  a  virtue  which  he  long  retained,  even  after  he  had  utterly

abandoned all other virtues. Upon Propertius Celer, once Praetor, but now

desiring leave to resign the dignity of Senator, as a burden to his poverty, he

bestowed a thousand great sesterces; upon ample information, that Celer's

necessities were derived from his father. Others, who attempted the same

thing,  he  ordered  to  lay  their  condition  before  the  Senate;  and  from  an

affectation of severity was thus austere even where he acted with uprightness.

Hence the rest preferred poverty and silence to begging and relief.

 
The same year the Tiber, being swelled with continual rains, overflowed the

level  parts  of  the  city;  and  the  common  destruction  of  men  and  houses

followed the returning flood. Hence Asinius Callus moved "that the Sibylline

books  might  be  consulted."  Tiberius  opposed  it,  equally  smothering  all

inquiries  whatsoever,  whether  into  matters  human  or  divine.  To  Ateius

Capito, however, and Lucius Arruntius, was committed the care of restraining

the river within its banks. The provinces of Achaia and Macedon, praying

relief  from  their  public  burdens,  were  for  the  present  discharged  of  theirProconsular government, and subjected to the Emperor's lieutenants. In the

entertainment of gladiators at Rome, Drusus presided: it was exhibited in the

name of Germanicus, and his own; and at it he manifested too much lust of

blood, even of the blood of slaves: a quality terrible to the populace; and

hence his father was said to have reproved him. His own absence from these

shows was variously construed: by some it was ascribed to his impatience of

a crowd; by others to his reserved and solitary genius, and his fear of an

unequal comparison with Augustus, who was wont to be a cheerful spectator.

But, that he thus purposely furnished matter for exposing the cruelty of his

son there, and for raising him popular hate, is what I would not believe;

though this too was asserted.

 
The dissensions of the theatre, begun last year, broke out now more violently,

with the slaughter of several, not of the people only, but of the soldiers, with

that of a Centurion. Nay, a Tribune of a Praetorian cohort was wounded,

whilst  they  were  securing  the  magistrates  from  insults,  and  quelling  the

licentiousness of the rabble. This riot was canvassed in the Senate, and votes

were  passing  for  empowering  the  Praetors  to  whip  the  players.  Haterius

Agrippa, Tribune of the People, opposed it; and was sharply reprimanded by

a speech of Asinius Gallus. Tiberius was silent, and to the Senate allowed

these empty apparitions of liberty. The opposition, however, prevailed, in

reverence to the authority of Augustus; who, upon a certain occasion, had

given  his  judgment,  "that  players  were  exempt  from  stripes:"  nor  would

Tiberius assume to violate any words of his. To limit the wages of players,

and restrain the licentiousness of their partisans, many decrees were made:

the  most  remarkable  were,  "That  no  Senator  should  enter  the  house  of  a

pantomime;  no  Roman  Knight  attend  them  abroad;  they  should  show

nowhere but in the theatre; and the Praetors should have power to punish any

insolence in the spectators with exile."

 
The  Spaniards  were,  upon  their  petition,  permitted  to  build  a  temple  to

Augustus in the colony of Tarragon; an example this for all the provinces to

follow.  In  answer  to  the  people,  who  prayed  to  be  relieved  from  the

centesima, a tax of one in the hundred, established at the end of the civil

wars, upon all vendible commodities; Tiberius by an edict declared, "That

upon this tax depended the fund for maintaining the army; nor even thus was

the Commonwealth equal to the expense, if before their twentieth year the

veterans were dismissed." So that the concessions made them during the latesedition, to discharge them finally at the end of sixteen years, as they were

made through necessity, were for the future abolished.

 
It was next proposed to the Senate, by Arruntius and Ateius, whether, in

order to restrain the overflowing of the Tiber, the channels of the several

rivers and lakes by which it was swelled, must not be diverted. Upon this

question  the  deputies  of  several  cities  and  colonies  were  heard.  The

Florentines besought, "that the bed of the Clanis [Footnote: Chiana.] might

not  be  turned  into  their  river  Arnus;  [Footnote:  Arno.]  for  that  the  same

would prove their utter ruin." The like plea was urged by the Interamnates;

[Footnote: Terni.] "since the most fruitful plains in Italy would be lost, if,

according  to  the  project,  the  Nar,  branched  out  into  rivulets,  overflowed

them." Nor were the Reatinians less earnest against stopping the outlets of the

Lake Velinus into the Nar; "otherwise," they said, "it would break over its

banks, and stagnate all the adjacent country; the direction of nature was best

in all natural things: it was she that to rivers had appointed their courses and

discharges, and set them their limits as well as their sources. Regard too was

to be paid to the religion of our Latin allies, who, esteeming the rivers of their

country sacred, had to them dedicated Priests, and altars, and groves; nay, the

Tiber  himself,  when  bereft  of  his  auxiliary  streams,  would  flow  with

diminished grandeur." Now, whether it were that the prayers of the colonies,

or the difficulty of the work, or the influence of superstition prevailed, it is

certain the opinion of Piso was followed; namely, that nothing should be

altered,

 
To  Poppeus  Sabinus  was  continued  his  province  of  Mesia;  and  to  it  was

added  that  of  Achaia  and  Macedon.  This  too  was  part  of  the  politics  of

Tiberius, to prolong governments, and maintain the same men in the same

armies, or civil employments, for the most part, to the end of their lives; with

what view, is not agreed. Some think "that from an impatience of returning

cares, he was for making whatever he once liked perpetual." Others, "that

from  the  malignity  of  his  invidious  nature,  he  regretted  the  preferring  of

many." There are some who believe, "that as he had a crafty penetrating

spirit, so he had an understanding ever irresolute and perplexed." So much is

certain, that he never courted any eminent virtue, yet hated vice; from the

best men he dreaded danger to himself, and disgrace to the public from the

worst. This hesitation mastered him so much at last that he committed foreign

governments to some, whom he meant never to suffer to leave Rome. 
Concerning the management of consular elections, either then or afterwards

under Tiberius, I can affirm scarce anything: such is the variance about it, not

only  amongst  historians,  but  even  in  his  own  speeches.  Sometimes,  not

naming the candidates, he described them by their family, by their life and

manners, and by the number of their campaigns; so as it might be apparent

whom he meant. Again, avoiding even to describe them, he exhorted the

candidates not to disturb the election by their intrigues, and promised himself

to take care of their interests. But chiefly he used to declare, "that to him none

had signified their pretensions, but such whose names he had delivered to the

Consuls; others too were at liberty to offer the like pretensions, if they trusted

to the favour of the Senate or their own merits." Specious words! but entirely

empty, or full of fraud; and by how much they were covered with the greater

guise of liberty, by so much threatening a more hasty and devouring bondage.

 THE
ANNALS:
BOOK I

 
                                      BOOK II 
                                      A.D. 16-19.

 
The commotions in the East happened not ungratefully to Tiberius, since then

he had a colour for separating Germanicus from his old and faithful legions;

for setting him over strange provinces, and exposing him at once to casual

perils and the efforts of fraud. But he, the more ardent he found the affections

of the soldiers, and the greater the hatred of his uncle, so much the more

intent upon a decisive victory, weighed with himself all the methods of that

war, with all the disasters and successes which had befallen him in it to this

his third year. He remembered "that the Germans were ever routed in a fair

battle, and upon equal ground; that woods and bogs, short summers, and early

winters, were their chief resources; that his own men suffered not so much

from their wounds, as from tedious marches, and the loss of their arms. The

Gauls were weary of furnishing horses; long and cumbersome was his train

of baggage, easily surprised, and with difficulty defended; but, if we entered

the country by sea, the invasion would be easy, and the enemy unapprised.

Besides, the war would be earlier begun; the legions and provisions would be

carried together; and the cavalry brought with safety, through the mouths and

channels of the rivers, into the heart of Germany."

 
On  that  method  therefore  he  fixed:  whilst  Publius  Vitellius  and  Publius

Cantius were sent to collect the tribute of the Gauls; Silius, Anteius, and

Caecina  had  the  direction  of  building  the  fleet.  A  thousand  vessels  were

thought sufficient, and with despatch finished: some were short, sharp at both

ends, and wide in the middle, the easier to endure the agitations of the waves;

some had flat bottoms, that without damage they might bear to run aground;

several had helms at each end, that by suddenly turning the oars only they

might work either way. Many were arched over, for carrying the engines of

war. They were fitted for holding horses and provisions, to fly with sails, to

run with oars, and the spirit and alacrity of the soldiers heightened the show

and terror of the fleet. They were to meet at the Isle of Batavia, which was

chosen for its easy landing, for its convenience to receive the forces, and

thence to transport them to the war. For the Rhine, flowing in one continual

channel, or only broken by small islands, is,  at the extremity of Batavia,

divided as it were into two rivers; one running still through Germany, and

retaining the same name and violent current, till it mixes with the ocean; the

other, washing the Gallic shore, with a broader and more gentle stream, is bythe  inhabitants  called  by  another  name,  the  Wahal,  which  it  soon  after

changes  for  that  of  the  river  Meuse,  by  whose  immense  mouth  it  is

discharged into the same ocean.

 
While the fleet sailed, Germanicus commanded Silius, his lieutenant, with a

flying band, to invade the Cattans; and he himself, upon hearing that the fort

upon  the  river  Luppia  [Footnote:  Lippe.]  was  besieged,  led  six  legions

thither: but the sudden rains prevented Silius from doing more than taking

some  small  plunder,  with  the  wife  and  daughter  of  Arpus,  Prince  of  the

Cattans; nor did the besiegers stay to fight Germanicus, but upon the report of

his approach stole off and dispersed. As they had, however, thrown down the

common tomb lately raised over the Varian legions, and the old altar erected

to Drusus, he restored the altar; and performed in person with the legions the

funeral ceremony of running courses to the honour of his father. To replace

the tomb was not thought fit; but all the space between Fort Aliso and the

Rhine, he fortified with a new barrier.

 
The  fleet  was  now  arrived,  the  provisions  were  sent  forward;  ships  were

assigned to the legions and the allies; and he entered the canal cut by Drusus,

and called by his name. Here he invoked his father "to be propitious to his

son attempting the same enterprises; to inspire him with the same counsels,

and animate him by his example." Hence he sailed fortunately through the

lakes and the ocean to the river Amisia, [Footnote: Ems.] and at the town of

Amisia the fleet was left upon the left shore; and it was a fault that it sailed

no  higher,  for  he  landed  the  army  on  the  right  shore,  so  that  in  making

bridges many days were consumed. The horse and the legions passed over

without danger, as it was yet ebb; but the returning tide disordered the rear,

especially the Batavians, while they played with the waves, and showed their

dexterity in swimming; and some were drowned. Whilst Germanicus was

encamping, he was told of the revolt of the Angrivarians behind him, and

thither he despatched a body of horse and light foot, under Stertinius. who

with fire and slaughter took vengeance on the perfidious revolters.

 
Between  the  Romans  and  the  Cheruscans  flowed  the  river  Visurgis,

[Footnote: Weser.] and on the banks of it stood Arminius, with the other

chiefs: he inquired whether Germanicus was come; and being answered that

he was there, he prayed leave to speak with his brother. This brother of his

was  in  the  army,  his  name  Flavius;  one  remarkable  for  his  lasting  faithtowards the Romans, and for the loss of an eye in the war under Tiberius.

This  request  was  granted:  Flavius  stepped  forward,  and  was  saluted  by

Arminius, who, having removed his own attendance, desired that our archers

ranged upon the opposite banks might retire. When they were withdrawn,

"How came you," says he to his brother, "by that deformity in your face?"

The brother having informed him where, and in what fight, was next asked,

"what  reward  he  had  received?"  Flavius  answered,  "Increase  of  pay,  the

chain, the crown, and other military gifts;" all which Arminius treated with

derision, as the vile wages of servitude.

 
Here began a warm contest: Flavius pleaded "the grandeur of the Roman

Empire,  the  power  of  the  Emperor,  the  Roman  clemency  to  submitting

nations, the heavy yoke of the vanquished; and that neither the wife nor son

of  Arminius  was  used  like  a  captive."  Arminius  to  all  this  opposed  "the

natural rights of their country, their ancient liberty, the domestic Gods of

Germany; he urged the prayers of their common mother joined to his own,

that he would not prefer the character of a deserter, that of a betrayer of his

family, his countrymen, and kindred, to the glory of being their commander."

By degrees they fell into reproaches; nor would the interposition of the river

have restrained them from blows, had not Stertinius hasted to lay hold on

Flavius, full of rage, and calling for his arms and his horse. On the opposite

side was seen Arminius, swelling with ferocity and threats, and denouncing

battle. For, of what he said, much was said in Latin, having as the General of

his countrymen served in the Roman armies.

 
Next  day,  the  German  army  stood  embattled  beyond  the  Visurgis.

Germanicus, who thought it became not a General to endanger the legions,

till for their passage and security he had placed bridges and guards, made the

horse  ford  over.  They  were  led  by  Stertinius,  and  Aemilius,  Lieutenant-

Colonel of a legion; and these two officers crossed the river in distant places,

to divide the foe. Cariovalda, Captain of the Batavians, passed it where most

rapid, and was by the Cheruscans, who feigned flight, drawn into a plain

surrounded with woods, whence they rushed out upon him and assaulted him

on every side; overthrew those who resisted, and pressed vehemently upon

those who gave way. The distressed Batavians formed themselves into a ring,

but were again broken, partly by a close assault, partly by distant showers of

darts. Cariovalda, having long sustained the fury of the enemy, exhorted his

men  to  draw  up  into  platoons,  and  break  through  the  prevailing  host;  hehimself  forced  his  way  into  their  centre,  and  fell  with  his  horse  under  a

shower of darts, and many of the principal Batavians round him; the rest were

saved by their own bravery, or rescued by the cavalry under Stertinius and

Aemilius.

 
Germanicus,  having  passed  the  Visurgis,  learned  from  a  deserter,  that

Arminius  had  marked  out  the  place  of  battle;  that  more  nations  had  also

joined him; that they rendezvoused in a wood sacred to Hercules, and would

attempt to storm our camp by night. The deserter was believed; the enemy's

fires were discerned; and the scouts having advanced towards them, reported

that  they  had  heard  the  neighing  of  horses,  and  the  hollow  murmur  of  a

mighty  and  tumultuous  host.  In  this  important  conjuncture,  upon  the

approach of a decisive battle, Germanicus thought it behoved him to learn the

inclinations and spirit of the soldiers and deliberated with himself how to be

informed without fraud: "for the reports of the Tribunes and Centurions used

to  be  oftener  pleasing  than  true;  his  Freedmen  had  still  slavish  souls,

incapable  of  free  speech;  friends  were  apt  to  flatter;  there  was  the  same

uncertainty in an assemble, where the counsel proposed by a few was wont to

be echoed by all; in truth, the minds of the soldiery were then best known,

when they were least watched; when free and over their meals, they frankly

disclosed their hopes and fears."

 
In  the  beginning  of  night,  he  went  out  at  the  augural  gate,  with  a  single

attendant; himself disguised with the skin of a wild beast hanging over his

shoulders; and choosing secret ways, he escaped the notice of the watch,

entered the lanes of the camp, listened from tent to tent, and enjoyed the

pleasing display of his own popularity and fame; as one was magnifying the

imperial  birth  of  his  general;  another,  his  graceful  person;  and  all,  his

patience,  condescension,  and  the  equality  of  his  soul  in  every  temper,

pleasant or grave: they confessed the gratitude due to so much merit, and that

in battle they ought to express it, and to sacrifice at the same time to glory

and revenge these perfidious Germans, who for ever violated stipulations and

peace. In the meantime one of the enemy who understood Latin rode up to

the palisades, and with a loud voice offered, in the name of Arminius, to

every deserter a wife and land, and as long as the war lasted an hundred

sesterces a day. [Footnote: 16s. 8d.] This contumely kindled the wrath of the

legions: "Let day come," they cried, "let battle be given: the soldiers would

seize and not accept the lands of the Germans; take and not receive Germanwives;  they,  however,  received  the  offer  as  an  omen  of  victory,  and

considered  the  money  and  women  as  their  destined  prey."  Near  the  third

watch  of  the  night,  they  approached  and  insulted  the  camp;  but  without

striking a blow, when they found the ramparts covered thick with cohorts,

and no advantage given.

 
Germanicus had the same night a joyful dream: he thought he sacrificed, and,

in place of his own robe besmeared with the sacred blood, received one fairer

from the hands of his grandmother Augusta; so that elevated by the omen,

and by equal encouragement from the auspices, he called an assembly, where

he opened his deliberations concerning the approaching battle with all the

advantages  contributing  to  victory:  "That  to  the  Roman  soldiers  not  only

plains and dales, but, with due circumspection, even woods and forests were

commodious for an engagement. The huge targets, the enormous spears, of

the Barbarians could never be wielded amongst thickets and trunks of trees

like Roman swords and javelins, and armour adjusted to the shape and size of

their bodies, so that with these tractable arms they might thicken their blows,

and strike with certainty at the naked faces of the enemy, since the Germans

were  neither  furnished  with  headpiece  nor  coat  of  mail,  nor  were  their

bucklers bound with leather or fortified with iron, but all bare basket-work or

painted boards; and though their first ranks were armed with pikes, the rest

had only stakes burnt at the end, or short and contemptible darts; for their

persons, as they were terrible to sight and violent in the onset, so they were

utterly impatient of wounds, unaffected with their own disgrace, unconcerned

for the honour of their general, whom they ever deserted and fled; in distress

cowards, in prosperity despisers of all divine, of all human laws. In fine, if

the army, after their fatigues at sea and their tedious marches by land, longed

for an utter end of their labour, by this battle they might gain it. The Elbe was

now nearer than the Rhine; and if they would make him a conqueror in those

countries  where  his  father  and  his  uncle  had  conquered,  the  war  was

concluded." The ardour of the soldiers followed the speech of the general,

and the signal for the onset was given.

 
Neither did Arminius or the other chiefs neglect to declare to their several

bands that "these Romans were the cowardly fugitives of the Varian army,

who, because they could not endure to fight, had afterwards chosen to rebel.

That some with backs deformed by wounds, some with limbs maimed by

tempests,  forsaken  of  hope,  and  the  Gods  against  them,  were  once  morepresenting their lives to their vengeful foes. Hitherto a fleet, and unfrequented

seas, had been the resources of their cowardice against an assaulting or a

pursuing enemy; but now that they were to engage hand to hand, vain would

be their relief from wind and oars after a defeat. The Germans needed only

remember  their  rapine,  cruelty,  and  pride;  and  that  to  themselves  nothing

remained but either to maintain their native liberty, or by death to prevent

bondage."

 
The enemy, thus inflamed and calling for battle, were led into a plain called

Idistavisus: [Footnote: Near Minden.] it lies between the Visurgis and the

hills, and winds unequally along, as it is straitened by the swellings of the

mountains or enlarged by the circuits of the river. Behind rose a forest of high

trees,  thick  of  branches  above  but  clear  of  bushes  below.  The  army  of

Barbarians kept the plain, and the entrances of the forest. The Cheruscans

alone sat down upon the mountain, in order to pour down from thence upon

the Romans as soon as they became engaged in the fight. Our army marched

thus: the auxiliary Gauls and Germans in front, after them the foot archers,

next four legions, and then Germanicus with two Praetorian cohorts and the

choice of the cavalry; then four legions more, and the light foot with archers

on horseback and the other troops of the allies; the men all intent to march in

order of battle and ready to engage as they marched.

 
As  the  impatient  bands  of  Cheruscans  were  now  perceived  descending

fiercely from the hills, Germanicus commanded a body of the best horse to

charge them in the flank, and Stertinius with the rest to wheel round to attack

them in the rear, and promised to be ready to assist them in person. During

this a joyful omen appeared: eight eagles were seen to fly toward the wood,

and to enter it; a presage of victory to the General. "Advance," he cried,

"follow the Roman birds; follow the tutelar Deities of the legions!" Instantly

the  foot  charged  the  enemy's  front,  and  instantly  the  detached  cavalry

attacked their flank and rear: this double assault had a strange event; the two

divisions of their army fled opposite ways; that in the woods ran to the plain;

that in the plain rushed into the woods. The Cheruscans, between both, were

driven from the hills; amongst them Arminius, remarkably brave, who with

his hand, his voice, and distinguished wounds was still sustaining the fight.

He had assaulted the archers, and would have broken through them, but the

cohorts of the Retians, the Vindelicians, and the Gauls marched to their relief;

however, by his own vigour and the force of his horse, he escaped, his facebesmeared with his own blood to avoid being known. Some have related that

the Chaucians, who were amongst the Roman auxiliaries, knew him, and let

him go; the same bravery or deceit procured Inguiomerus his escape; the rest

were everywhere slain; and great numbers attempting to swim the Visurgis

were destroyed in it, either pursued with darts, or swallowed by the current,

or overwhelmed with the weight of the crowd, or buried under the falling

banks; some seeking a base refuge on the tops of trees, and concealment

amongst the branches, were shot in sport by the archers, or squashed as the

trees were felled: a mighty victory this, and to us far from bloody!

 
This slaughter of the foe, from the fifth hour of the day till night, filled the

country for ten miles with carcasses and arms: amongst the spoils, chains

were found, which, sure of conquering, they had brought to bind the Roman

captives. The soldiers proclaimed Tiberius Imperator upon the field of battle,

and raising a mount, placed upon it as trophies the German arms, with the

names of all the vanquished nations inscribed below.

 
This  sight  filled  the  Germans  with  more  anguish  and  rage  than  all  their

wounds, past afflictions, and slaughters. They, who were just prepared to

abandon their dwellings, and flit beyond the Elbe, meditate war and grasp

their arms: people, nobles, youth, aged, all rush suddenly upon the Roman

army in its march and disorder it. They next chose their camp, a strait and

moist plain shut in between a river and a forest, the forest too surrounded

with a deep marsh, except on one side, which was closed with a barrier raised

by the Angrivarians between them and the Cheruscans. Here stood their foot;

their horse were distributed and concealed amongst the neighbouring groves,

thence, by surprise, to beset the legions in the rear as soon as they had entered

the wood.

 
Nothing of all this was a secret to Germanicus: he knew their counsels, their

stations, what steps they pursued, what measures they concealed; and, to the

destruction of the enemy, turned their own subtilty and devices. To Seius

Tubero, his Lieutenant, he committed the horse and the field; the infantry so

disposed, that part might pass the level approaches into the wood, and the rest

force the ramparts; this was the most arduous task, and to himself he reserved

it; the rest he left to his Lieutenants. Those who had the even ground to

traverse, broke easily in; but they who were to assail the rampart, were as

grievously battered from above, as if they had been storming a wall. TheGeneral perceived the inequality of this close attack, and drawing off the

legions a small distance, ordered the slingers to throw, and the engineers to

play, to beat off the enemy: immediately showers of darts were poured from

the engines, and the defenders of the barrier, the more bold and exposed they

were, with the more wounds they were beaten down. Germanicus, having

taken the rampart, first forced his way, at the head of the Praetorian cohorts,

into the woods, and there it was fought foot to foot; behind, the enemy were

begirt with the morass, the Romans with the mountains or the rivers; no room

for either to retreat, no hope but in valour, no safety but in victory.

 
The Germans had no inferior courage, but they were exceeded in the fashion

of  arms  and  art  of  fighting.  Their  mighty  multitude,  hampered  in  narrow

places, could not push nor recover their long spears, nor practise in a close

combat their usual boundings and velocity of limbs. On the contrary, our

soldiers, with handy swords, and their breasts closely guarded with a buckler,

delved  the  large  bodies  and  naked  faces  of  the  Barbarians,  and  opened

themselves  a  way  with  a  havoc  of  the  enemy:  besides,  the  activity  of

Arminius  now  failed  him,  either  spent  through  his  continual  efforts  or

slackened by a wound just received. Inguiomerus was everywhere upon the

spur,  animating  the  battle,  but  fortune  rather  than  courage  deserted  him.

Germanicus, to be the easier known, pulled off his helmet, and exhorted his

men "to prosecute the slaughter; they wanted no captives," he said; "only the

cutting off that people root and branch would put an end to the war." It was

now late in the day, and he drew off a legion to make a camp; the rest glutted

themselves till night, with the blood of the foe; the horse fought with doubtful

success.

 
Germanicus, in a speech from the tribunal, praised his victorious army, and

raised  a  monument  of  arms  with  a  proud  inscription:  "That  the  army  of

Tiberius Caesar, having vanquished entirely the nations between the Rhine

and  the  Elbe,  had  consecrated  that  monument  to  Mars,  to  Jupiter,  and  to

Augustus." Of himself, he made no mention, either fearful of provoking envy,

or  that  he  thought  it  sufficient  praise  to  have  deserved  it.  He  had  next

commanded Stertinius to carry the war amongst the Angrivarians; but they

instantly  submitted;  and  these  supplicants,  by  yielding  without  articles,

obtained pardon without reserve.

 
The summer now declining, some of the legions were sent back into winterquarters  by  land;  more  were  embarked  with  Germanicus  upon  the  river

Amisia, to go from thence by the ocean. The sea at first was serene, no sound

or agitation but from the oars or sails of a thousand ships; but suddenly a

black host of clouds poured a storm of hail; furious winds roared on every

side, and the tempest darkened the deep, so that all prospect was lost; and it

was impossible to steer. The soldiers too, unaccustomed to the terrors of the

sea, in the hurry of fear disordered the mariners, or interrupted the skilful by

unskilful help. At last the south wind, mastering all the rest, drove the ocean

and the sky: the tempest derived new force from the windy mountains and

swelling rivers of Germany, as well as from an immense train of clouds; and

contracting  withal  fresh  vigour  from  the  boisterous  neighbourhood  of  the

north, it hurled the ships and tossed them into the open ocean, or against

islands  shored  with  rocks  or  dangerously  beset  with  covered  shoals.  The

ships by degrees, with great labour and the change of the tide, were relieved

from  the  rocks  and  sands,  but  remained  at  the  mercy  of  the  winds;  their

anchors could not hold them; they were full of water, nor could all their

pumps discharge it: hence, to lighten and raise the vessels swallowing at their

decks the invading waves, the horses, beasts, baggage, and even the arms

were cast into the deep.

 
By how much the German ocean is more outrageous than the rest of the sea,

and the German climate excels in rigour, by so much this ruin was reckoned

to exceed in greatness and novelty. They were engaged in a tempestuous sea,

believed deep without bottom, vast without bounds, or no shores near but

hostile shores: part of the fleet were swallowed up; many were driven upon

remote  islands  void  of  human  culture,  where  the  men  perished  through

famine, or were kept alive by the carcasses of horses cast in by the flood.

Only the galley of Germanicus landed upon the coast of the Chaucians, where

wandering sadly, day and night, upon the rocks and prominent shore, and

incessantly accusing himself as the author of such mighty destruction, he was

hardly  restrained  by  his  friends  from  casting  himself  desperately  into  the

same hostile floods. At last, with the returning tide and an assisting gale, the

ships began to return, all maimed, almost destitute of oars, or with coats

spread for sails; and some, utterly disabled, were dragged by those that were

less. He repaired them hastily, and despatched them to search the islands; and

by this care many men were gleaned up; many were by the Angrivarians, our

new subjects, redeemed from their maritime neighbours and restored; andsome, driven into Great Britain, were sent back by the little British kings.

Those  who  had  come  from  afar,  recounted  wonders  at  their  return,  "the

impetuosity  of  whirlwinds;  wonderful  birds;  sea  monsters  of  ambiguous

forms,  between  man  and  beasts."  Strange  sights  these!  or  the  effects  of

imagination and fear.

 
The noise of this wreck, as it animated the Germans with hopes of renewing

the war, awakened Germanicus also to restrain them: he commanded Caius

Silius, with thirty thousand foot and three thousand horse, to march against

the Cattans: he himself, with a greater force, invaded the Marsians, where he

learnt from Malovendus, their general, lately taken into our subjection, that

the Eagle of one of Varus's legions was hid underground in a neighbouring

grove, and kept by a slender guard. Instantly two parties were despatched;

one to face the enemy and provoke them from their post; the other to beset

their rear and dig up the Eagle; and success attended both. Hence Germanicus

advanced with great alacrity, laid waste the country, and smote the foe, either

not daring to engage, or, wherever they engaged, suddenly defeated. Nor, as

we learnt from the prisoners, were they ever seized with greater dismay: "The

Romans," they cried, "are invincible: no calamities can subdue them: they

have wrecked their fleet; their arms are lost; our shores are covered with the

bodies  of  their  horses  and  men;  and  yet  they  attack  us  with  their  usual

ferocity, with the same firmness, and with numbers as it were increased."

 
The army was from thence led back into winter quarters, full of joy to have

balanced, by this prosperous expedition, their late misfortune at sea; and by

the bounty of Germanicus, their joy was heightened, since to each sufferer he

caused  to  be  paid  as  much  as  each  declared  he  had  lost;  neither  was  it

doubted but the enemy were humbled, and concerting measures for obtaining

peace, and that the next summer would terminate the war. But Tiberius by

frequent  letters  urged  him  "to  come  home,  there  to  celebrate  the  triumph

already decreed him; urged that he had already tried enough of events, and

tempted abundant hazards: he had indeed fought great and successful battles;

but he must likewise remember his losses and calamities, which, however,

owing to wind and waves, and no fault of the general, were yet great and

grievous. He himself had been sent nine times into Germany by Augustus,

and effected much more by policy than arms: it was thus he had brought the

Sigambrians into subjection, thus drawn the Suevians and King Maroboduus

under the bonds of peace. The Cheruscans too, and the other hostile nations,now the Roman vengeance was satiated, might be left to pursue their own

national feuds." Germanicus besought one year to accomplish his conquest;

but Tiberius assailed his modesty with a new bait and fresh opportunity, by

offering him another Consulship, for the administration of which he was to

attend  in  person  at  Rome.  He  added,  "that  if  the  war  was  still  to  be

prosecuted, Germanicus should leave a field of glory to his brother Drusus, to

whom there now remained no other; since the Empire had nowhere a war to

maintain but in Germany, and thence only Drusus could acquire the title of

Imperator, and merit the triumphal laurel." Germanicus persisted no longer;

though  he  knew  that  this  was  all  feigned  and  hollow,  and  saw  himself

invidiously torn away from a harvest of ripe glory.

 
Decrees of the Senate were made for driving astrologers and magicians out of

Italy;  and  one  of  the  herd,  Lucius  Pituanius,  was  precipitated  from  the

Tarpeian  Rock:  Publius  Marcius,  another,  was,  by  the  judgment  of  the

Consuls,  at  the  sound  of  trumpet  executed  without  the  Esquiline  Gate,

according to the ancient form.

 
Next time the Senate sat, long discourses against the luxury of the city were

made  by  Quintus  Haterius,  a  consular,  and  by  Octavius  Fronto,  formerly

Praetor; and a law was passed "against using table-plate of solid gold, and

against men debasing themselves with gorgeous and effeminate silks." Fronto

went further, and desired that "the quantities of silver plate, the expense of

furniture,  and  the  number  of  domestics  might  be  limited;"  for  it  was  yet

common for senators to depart from the present debate and offer, as their

advice, whatever they judged conducing to the interest of the commonweal.

Against him it was argued by Asinius Callus, "That with the growth of the

Empire  private  riches  were  likewise  grown,  and  it  was  no  new  thing  for

citizens  to  live  according  to  their  conditions,  but  agreeable  to  the  most

primitive usage: the ancient Fabricii and the later Scipios, having different

wealth,  lived  differently;  but  all  suitably  to  the  several  stages  of  the

Commonwealth. Public property was accompanied with domestic; but when

the  State  rose  to  such  a  height  of  magnificence,  the  magnificence  of

particulars rose too. As to plate, and train, and expense, there was no standard

of excess or frugality, but from the fortunes of men. The law, indeed, had

made a distinction between the fortunes of senators and knights; not for any

natural difference between them, but that they who excelled in place, rank,

and civil pre-eminence, might excel too in other particulars, such as conducedto the health of the body or to the peace and solacement of the soul; unless it

were expected, that the most illustrious citizens should sustain the sharpest

cares, and undergo the heaviest fatigues and dangers, but continue destitute of

every alleviation of fatigue and danger and care." Gallus easily prevailed,

whilst under worthy names he avowed and supported popular vices in an

assembly engaged in them. Tiberius too had said, "That it was not a season

for reformation; or, if there were any corruption of manners, there would not

be wanting one to correct them."

 
During these transactions, Lucius Piso, after he had declaimed bitterly in the

Senate  against  "the  ambitious  practices  and  intrigues  of  the  Forum,  the

corruption  of  the  tribunals,  and  the  inhumanity  of  the  pleaders  breathing

continual terror and impeachments," declared "he would entirely relinquish

Rome, and retire into a quiet corner of the country, far distant and obscure."

With these words he left the Senate; Tiberius was provoked; and yet not only

soothed him with gentle words, but likewise obliged Piso's relations, by their

authority or entreaties, to retain him. The same Piso gave soon after an equal

instance of the indignation of the free spirit, by prosecuting a suit against

Urgulania; a lady whom the partial friendship of Livia had set at defiance

with the laws. Urgulania being carried, for protection, to the palace, despised

the  efforts  of  Piso;  so  that  neither  did  she  submit;  nor  would  he  desist,

notwithstanding  the  complaints  and  resentments  of  Livia,  that  in  the

prosecution "violence and indignity were done to her own person." Tiberius

promised  to  attend  the  trial,  and  assist  Urgulania;  but  only  promised  in

civility to his mother, for so far he thought it became him; and thus left the

palace, ordering his guards to follow at a distance. People the while crowded

about him, and he walked with a slow and composed air: as he lingered, and

prolonged the time and way with various discourse, the trial went on. Piso

would not be mollified by the importunity of his friends; and hence at last the

Empress ordered the payment of the money claimed by him. This was the

issue of the affair: by it, Piso lost no renown; and it signally increased the

credit of Tiberius. The power, however, of Urgulania was so exorbitant to the

State, that she disdained to appear a witness in a certain cause before the

Senate: and, when it had been always usual even for the Vestal Virgins to

attend the Forum and Courts of Justice, as oft as their evidence was required;

a Praetor was sent to examine Urgulania at her own house.

 
The procrastination which happened this year in the public affairs, I shouldnot mention, but that the different opinions of Cneius Piso and Asinius Gallus

about it, are worth knowing. Their dispute was occasioned by a declaration of

Tiberius; "that he was about to be absent," and it was the motion of Piso,

"that for that very reason, the prosecution of public business was the rather to

be continued; since, as in the Prince's absence, the Senate and equestrian

order might administer their several parts, the same would redound to the

honour of the Commonwealth." This was a declaration for liberty, and in it

Piso  had  prevented  Gallus,  who  now  in  opposition  said,  "that  nothing

sufficiently illustrious, nor suiting the dignity of the Roman People, could be

transacted but under the immediate eye of the Emperor, and therefore the

conflux of suitors and affairs from Italy and the provinces must by all means

be reserved for his presence." Tiberius heard and was silent, while the debate

was managed on both sides with mighty vehemence; but the adjournment was

carried.

 
A debate too arose between Gallus and the Emperor: for Gallus moved "that

the magistrates should be henceforth elected but once every five years; that

the legates of the legions, who had never exercised the Praetorships, should

be appointed Praetors; and that the Prince should nominate twelve candidates

every year." It was not doubted but this motion had a deeper aim, and that by

it  the  secret  springs  and  reserves  of  imperial  power  were  invaded.  But

Tiberius, as if he rather apprehended the augmentation of his power, argued

"that it was a heavy task upon his moderation, to choose so many magistrates,

and  to  postpone  so  many  candidates.  That  disgusts  from  disappointments

were hardly avoided in yearly elections; though, for their solacement, fresh

hopes remained of approaching success in the next; now how great must be

the hatred, how lasting the resentment of such whose pretensions were to be

rejected beyond five years? and whence could it be foreseen that, in so long a

tract of time, the same men would continue to have the same dispositions, the

same alliances and fortunes? even an annual designation to power made men

imperious; how imperious would it make them, if they bore the honour for

five years! besides, it would multiply every single magistrate into five, and

utterly subvert the laws which had prescribed a proper space for exercising

the  diligence  of  the  candidates,  and  for  soliciting  as  well  as  enjoying

preferments."

 
By this speech, in appearance popular, he still retained the spirit and force of

the  sovereignty.  He  likewise  sustained  by  gratuities,  the  dignity  of  somenecessitous Senators: hence it was the more wondered, that he received with

haughtiness and repulse the petition of Marcus Hortalus, a young man of

signal quality and manifestly poor. He was the grandson of Hortensius the

Orator; and had been encouraged by the deified Augustus, with a bounty of a

thousand  great  sestertia,  to  marry  for  posterity;  purely  to  prevent  the

extinction of a family most illustrious and renowned. The Senate were sitting

in the palace, and Hortalus having set his four children before the door, fixed

his eyes, now upon the statue of Hortensius, placed amongst the orators; then

upon that of Augustus; and instead of speaking to the question, began on this

wise:  "Conscript  Fathers,  you  see  there  the  number  and  infancy  of  my

children; not mine by my own choice, but in compliance with the advice of

the Prince: such too was the splendour of my ancestors, that it merited to be

perpetuated in their race; but for my own particular, who, marred by the

revolution of the times, could not raise wealth, nor engage popular favour,

nor cultivate the hereditary fortune of our house, the fortune of Eloquence: I

deemed it sufficient if, in my slender circumstances, I lived no disgrace to

myself, no burden to others. Commanded by the Emperor, I took a wife;

behold the offspring of so many Consuls; behold the descendants of so many

Dictators!  nor  is  this  remembrance  invidiously  made,  but  made  to  move

mercy. In the progress of your reign, Caesar, these children may arrive at the

honours in your gift; defend them in the meantime from want: they are the

great-grandsons of Hortensius; they are the foster sons of Augustus."

 
The inclination of the Senate was favourable; an incitement this to Tiberius

the more eagerly to thwart Hortalus. These were in effect his words: "If all

that  are  poor  recur  hither  for  a  provision  of  money  to  their  children,  the

public will certainly fail, and yet particulars never be satiated. Our ancestors,

when they permitted a departure from the question, to propose somewhat

more important to the State, did not therefore permit it, that we might here

transact  domestic  matters,  and  augment  our  private  rents:  an  employment

invidious both in the Senate and the Prince; since, whether they grant or deny

the  petitioned  bounties,  either  the  people  or  the  petitioners  will  ever  be

offended. But these, in truth, are not petitions; they are demands made against

order, and made by surprise: while you are assembled upon other affairs, he

stands up and urges your pity, by the number and infancy of his children;

with the same violence, he charges the attack to me, and as it were bursts

open the exchequer; but if by popular bounties we exhaust it, by rapine andoppression  we  must  supply  it.  The  deified  Augustus  gave  you  money,

Hortalus;  but  without  solicitation  he  gave  it,  and  on  no  condition  that  it

should always be given: otherwise diligence will languish; sloth will prevail;

and  men  having  no  hopes  in  resources  of  their  own,  no  anxiety  for

themselves, but all securely relying on foreign relief, will become private

sluggards  and  public  burdens."  These  and  the  like  reasonings  of  Tiberius

were differently received; with approbation by those whose way it is to extol,

without distinction, all the doings of Princes, worthy and unworthy; by most,

however, with silence, or low and discontented murmurs. Tiberius perceived

it, and having paused a little, said "his answer was particularly to Hortalus;

but  if  the  Senate  thought  fit,  he  would  give  his  sons  two  hundred  great

sestertia each." For this all the Senators presented their thanks; only Hortalus

said nothing; perhaps through present awe, or perhaps possessed, even in

poverty, with the grandeur of his ancient nobility. Nor did Tiberius ever show

further pity, though the house of Hortensius was fallen into shameful distress.

 
At the end of the year, a triumphal arch was raised near the Temple of Saturn;

a monument this for the recovery of the Varian Eagles, under the conduct of

Germanicus,  under  the  auspices  of  Tiberius.  A  temple  was  dedicated  to

Happy  Fortune  near  the  Tiber,  in  the  gardens  bequeathed  to  the  Roman

People  by  Caesar,  the  Dictator.  A  chapel  was  consecrated  to  the  Julian

family, and statues to the deified Augustus, in the suburbs called Bovillae. In

the consulship of Caius Celius and Lucius Pomponius, the six- and-twentieth

of May, Germanicus Caesar triumphed over the Cheruscans, the Cattans, the

Angrivarians, and the other nations as far as the Elbe. In the triumph were

carried all the spoils and captives, with the representations of mountains, of

rivers, and of battles; so that his conquests, because he was restrained from

completing them, were taken for complete. His own graceful person, and his

chariot filled with his five children, heightened the show and the delight of

the beholders; yet they were checked with secret fears, as they remembered

"that popular favour had proved malignant to his father Drusus; that his uncle

Marcellus  was  snatched,  in  his  youth,  from  the  burning  affections  of  the

populace; and that ever short-lived and unfortunate were the favourites of the

Roman People."

 
Tiberius distributed to the people, in the name of Germanicus, three hundred

sesterces a man, and named himself his colleague in the Consulship. Nor

even thus did he gain the opinion of tenderness and sincerity: in effect, onpretence of investing the young Prince with fresh preferment and honours, he

resolved to alienate him from Rome; and, to accomplish it, craftily framed an

occasion,  or  snatched  such  an  one  as  chance  presented.  Archelaus  had

enjoyed the kingdom of Cappadocia now fifty years; a Prince under the deep

displeasure of Tiberius, because, in his retirement at Rhodes, the King had

paid him no sort of court or distinction: an omission this which proceeded

from  no  disdain,  but  from  the  warnings  given  him  by  the  confidents  of

Augustus;  for  that  the  young  Caius  Caesar,  the  presumptive  heir  to  the

sovereignty, then lived, and was sent to compose and administer the affairs of

the East; hence the friendship of Tiberius was reckoned then dangerous. But

when, by the utter fall of the family of the Caesars, he had gained the Empire,

he enticed Archelaus to Rome, by means of letters from his mother, who,

without  dissembling  her  son's  resentment,  offered  the  King  his  mercy,

provided he came and in person implored it. He, who was either ignorant of

the snare, or dreaded violence if he appeared to perceive it, hastened to the

city, where he was received by Tiberius with great sternness and wrath, and

soon after accused as a criminal in the Senate. The crimes alleged against him

were mere fictions; yet, as equal treatment is unusual to kings, and to be

treated like malefactors intolerable; Archelaus, who was broken with grief as

well as age, by choice or fate ended his life; his kingdom was reduced into a

province, and by its revenues Tiberius declared the tax of a hundredth penny

would be abated, and reduced it for the future to the two hundredth. At the

same time died Antiochus, king of Comagena, as also Philopator, king of

Cilicia; and great combustions shook these nations; whilst of the people many

desired Roman government, and many were addicted to domestic monarchy.

The  provinces,  too,  of  Syria  and  Judea,  as  they  were  oppressed  with

impositions, prayed an abatement of tribute.

 
These affairs, and such as I have above related concerning Armenia, Tiberius

represented to the Fathers, and "that the commotions of the East could only

be settled by the wisdom and abilities of Germanicus; for himself, his age

now  declined,  and  that  of  Drusus  was  not  yet  sufficiently  ripe."  The

provinces beyond the sea were thence decreed to Germanicus, with authority

superior to all those who obtained provinces by lot, or the nomination of the

Prince; but Tiberius had already taken care to remove from the government of

Syria Creticus Silanus, one united to Germanicus in domestic alliance, by

having to Nero, the eldest son of Germanicus, betrothed his daughter. In hisroom he had preferred Cneius Piso, a man of violent temper, incapable of

subjection, and heir to all the ferocity and haughtiness of his father Piso; the

same  who,  in  the  civil  war,  assisted  the  reviving  party  against  Caesar  in

Africa with vehement efforts; and then followed Brutus and Cassius, but had

at last leave to come home, yet disdained to sue for any public offices; nay,

was even courted by Augustus to accept the Consulship. His son, besides his

hereditary pride and impetuosity, was elevated with the nobility and wealth

of Plancina his wife; scarce yielded he to Tiberius, and, as men far beneath

him, despised the sons of Tiberius; neither did he doubt but he was set over

Syria  on  purpose  to  thwart  the  measures  and  defeat  all  the  views  of

Germanicus. Some even believed that he had to this purpose secret orders

from Tiberius, as it was certain that Livia directed Plancina to exert the spirit

of the sex, and by constant emulation and indignities persecute Agrippina.

For the whole court was rent, and their affections secretly divided between

Drusus and Germanicus. Tiberius was partial to Drusus, as his own son by

generation; others loved Germanicus; the more for the aversion of his uncle,

and for being by his mother of more illustrious descent; as Marc Anthony

was  his  grandfather,  and  Augustus  his  great-  uncle.  On  the  other  side,

Pomponius  Atticus,  a  Roman  knight,  by  being  the  great-grandfather  of

Drusus,  seemed  thence  to  have  derived  a  stain  upon  the  images  of  the

Claudian  house;  besides,  Agrippina,  the  wife  of  Germanicus,  did  in  the

fruitfulness of her body and the reputation of her virtue far excel Livia, the

wife of Drusus. Yet the two brothers lived in amiable dearness and concord,

no  wise  shaken  or  estranged  by  the  reigning  contention  amongst  their

separate friends and adherents.

 
Drusus was soon after sent into Illyricum in order to inure him to war, and

gain him the affections of the army; besides, Tiberius thought that the youth,

who loved wantoning in the luxuries of Rome, would be reformed in the

camp, and that his own security would be enlarged when both his sons were

at the head of the legions. But the pretence of sending him was the protection

of the Suevians, who were then imploring assistance against the powers of

the Cheruscans. For these nations, who since the departure of the Romans

saw themselves no longer threatened with terrors from abroad, and were then

particularly  engaged  in  a  national  competition  for  glory,  had  relapsed,  as

usual, into their old intestine feuds, and turned their arms upon each other.

The two people were equally powerful, and their two leaders equally brave;but differently esteemed, as the title of king upon Maroboduus had drawn the

hate and aversion of his countrymen; whilst Arminius, as a champion warring

for the defence of liberty, was the universal object of popular affection.

 
Hence not only the Cheruscans and their confederates, they who had been the

ancient  soldiery  of  Arminius,  took  arms;  but  to  him  too  revolted  the

Semnones  and  Langobards,  both  Suevian  nations,  and  even  subjects  of

Maroboduus; and by their accession he would have exceeded in puissance,

but Inguiomerus with his band of followers deserted to Maroboduus; for no

other cause than disdain, that an old man and an uncle like himself should

obey Arminius, a young man, his nephew. Both armies were drawn out, with

equal hopes; nor disjointed, like the old German battles, into scattered parties

for loose and random attacks; for by long war with us they had learnt to

follow their ensigns, to strengthen their main body with parties of reserves,

and to observe the orders of their generals. Arminius was now on horseback

viewing all the ranks: as he rode through them he magnified their past feats;

"their liberty recovered; the slaughtered legions; the spoils of arms wrested

from  the  Romans;  monuments  of  victory  still  retained  in  some  of  their

hands." Upon Maroboduus he fell with contumelious names, as "a fugitive,

one of no abilities in war; a coward who had sought defence from the gloomy

coverts of the Hercynian woods, and then by gifts and solicitations courted

the  alliance  of  Rome;  a  betrayer  of  his  country,  and  a  lifeguard-man  of

Caesar's, worthy to be exterminated with no less hostile vengeance than in the

slaughter of Quinctilius Varus they had shown. Let them only remember so

many  battles  bravely  fought;  the  events  of  which,  particularly  the  utter

expulsion of the Romans, were sufficient proofs with whom remained the

glory of the war."

 
Neither did Maroboduus fail to boast himself and depreciate the foe. "In the

person of Inguiomerus," he said (holding him by the hand), "rested the whole

renown of the Cheruscans; and from his counsels began all their exploits that

ended in success. Arminius, a man of a frantic spirit, and a novice in affairs,

assumed to himself the glory of another, for having by treachery surprised

three legions, which expected no foe, and their leader, who feared no fraud; a

base  surprise,  revenged  since  on  Germany  with  heavy  slaughters,  and  on

Arminius himself with domestic infamy, while his wife and his son still bore

the bonds of captivity. For himself, when attacked formerly by Tiberius at the

head of twelve legions, he had preserved unstained the glory of Germany,and on equal terms ended the war. Nor did he repent of the treaty, since it

was still in their hands to wage anew equal war with the Romans, or save

blood and maintain peace." The armies, besides the incitements from these

speeches,  were  animated  by  national  stimulations  of  their  own.  The

Cheruscans fought for their ancient renown; the Langobards for their recent

liberty; and the Suevians and their king, on the contrary, were struggling for

the augmentation of their monarchy. Never did armies make a fiercer onset;

never  had  onset  a  more  ambiguous  event;  for  both  the  right  wings  were

routed, and hence a fresh encounter was certainly expected, till Maroboduus

drew off his army and encamped upon the hills; a manifest sign this that he

was humbled. Frequent desertions too leaving him at last naked of forces, he

retired to the Marcomannians, and thence sent ambassadors to Tiberius to

implore succours. They were answered, "That he had no right to invoke aid of

the Roman arms against the Cheruscans, since to the Romans, while they

were warring with the same foe, he had never administered any assistance."

Drusus  was,  however,  sent  away,  as  I  have  said,  with  the  character  of  a

negotiator of peace.

 
The same year twelve noble cities of Asia were overturned by an earthquake:

the ruin happened in the night, and the more dreadful as its warnings were

unobserved;  neither  availed  the  usual  sanctuary  against  such  calamities,

namely, a flight to the fields, since those who fled, the gaping earth devoured.

It is reported "that mighty mountains subsided, plains were heaved into high

hills: and that with flashes and eruptions of fire, the mighty devastation was

everywhere accompanied." The Sardians felt most heavily the rage of the

concussion,  and  therefore  most  compassion:  Tiberius  promised  them  an

hundred thousand great sesterces, and remitted their taxes for five years. The

inhabitants  of  Magnesia,  under  Mount  Sipylus,  were  held  the  next  in

sufferings, and had proportionable relief. The Temnians, Philadelphians, the

Aegeatans, Apollonians, with those called the Mostenians or Macedonians of

Hyrcania, the cities too of Hierocaesarea, Cyme, and Tmolus, were all for the

same term eased of tribute. It was likewise resolved to send one of the Senate

to view the desolations and administer proper remedies: Marcus Aletus was

therefore chosen, one of Praetorian rank; because, a Consular Senator then

governing  Asia,  had  another  of  the  like  quality  been  sent,  an  emulation

between equals was apprehended, and consequently opposition and delays.

 
The  credit  of  this  noble  bounty  to  the  public,  he  increased  by  privateliberalities, which proved equally popular: the estate of the wealthy Aemilia

Musa,  claimed  by  the  exchequer,  as  she  died  intestate,  he  surrendered  to

Aemilius Lepidus, to whose family she seemed to belong; as also to Marcus

Servilius the inheritance of Patuleius, a rich Roman knight, though part of it

had been bequeathed to himself; but he found Servilius named sole heir in a

former and well-attested will. He said such was "the nobility of both, that

they deserved to be supported." Nor did he ever to himself accept any man's

inheritance, but where former friendship gave him a title. The wills of such as

were strangers to him, and of such as, from hate and prejudice to others, had

appointed the Prince their heir, he utterly rejected. But, as he relieved the

honest poverty of the virtuous, so he degraded from the Senate (or suffered to

quit it of their own accord) Vibidius Varro, Marius Nepos, Appius Appianus,

Cornelius  Sylla,  and  Quintus  Vitellius,  all  prodigals,  and  only  through

debauchery indigent.

 
About this time Tiberius finished and consecrated what Augustus began, the

Temples of the Gods consumed by age or fire: that near the great Circus,

vowed by Aulus Posthumius the Dictator, to Bacchus, Proserpina, and Ceres.

In the same place the Temple of Flora, founded by Lucius Publicius and

Marcus Publicius while they were Aediles. The Temple of Janus, built in the

Herb Market by Caius Duillius, who first signalised the Roman power at sea,

and  merited  a  naval  triumph  over  the  Carthaginians.  That  of  Hope  was

dedicated by Germanicus: this temple Atilius had vowed in the same war.

 
The Consuls for the following year were, Tiberius the third time, Germanicus

the second. This dignity overtook Germanicus at Nicopolis, a city of Achaia,

whither he arrived by the coast of Illyricum, from visiting his brother Drusus,

then abiding in Dalmatia; and had suffered a tempestuous passage, both in the

Adriatic and Ionian Sea: he therefore spent a few days to repair his fleet, and

viewed the while the Bay of Actium renowned for the naval victory there; as

also the spoils consecrated by Augustus, and the Camp of Anthony, with an

affecting remembrance of these his ancestors; for Anthony, as I have said,

was his great uncle, Augustus his grandfather; hence this scene proved to

Germanicus a mighty source of images pleasing and sad. Next he proceeded

to Athens, where in concession to that ancient city, allied to Rome, he would

use but one Lictor. The Greeks received him with the most elaborate honours,

and to dignify their personal flattery, carried before him tablatures of the

signal deeds and sayings of his ancestors. 
Hence he sailed to Eubea, thence to Lesbos, where Agrippina was delivered

of Julia, who proved her last birth; then he kept the coast of Asia and visited

Perinthus  and  Byzantium,  cities  of  Thrace,  and  entered  the  straits  of

Propontis, and the mouth of the Euxine; fond of beholding ancient places

long celebrated by fame: he relieved at the same time, the provinces wherever

distracted with intestine factions, or aggrieved with the oppressions of their

magistrates.  In  his  return  he  strove  to  see  the  religious  rites  of  the

Samothracians, but by the violence of the north wind was repulsed from the

shore.  As  he  passed,  he  saw  Troy  and  her  remains,  venerable  for  the

vicissitude of her fate, and for the birth of Rome: regaining the coast of Asia,

he put in at Colophon, to consult there the oracle of the Clarian Apollo: it is

no Pythoness that represents the God here, as at Delphos, but a Priest, one

chosen from certain families, chiefly of Miletus; neither requires he more

than just to hear the names and numbers of the querists, and then descends

into the oracular cave; where, after a draught of water from a secret spring,

though  ignorant  for  the  most  part  of  letters  and  poetry,  he  yet  utters  his

answers in verse, which has for its subject the conceptions and wishes of each

consultant. He was even said to have sung to Germanicus his hastening fate,

but as oracles are wont, in terms dark and doubtful.

 
But Cneius Piso, hurrying to the execution of his purposes, terrified the city

of Athens by a tempestuous entry, and reproached them in a severe speech,

with oblique censure of Germanicus, "that debasing the dignity of the Roman

name,  he  had  paid  excessive  court,  not  to  the  Athenians  by  so  many

slaughters long since extinct, but to the then mixed scum of nations there; for

that these were they who had leagued with Mithridates against Sylla, and

with Anthony against Augustus." He even charged them with the errors and

misfortunes  of  ancient  Athens;  her  impotent  attempts  against  the

Macedonians; her violence and ingratitude to her own citizens. He was also

an enemy to their city from personal anger; because they would not pardon at

his request one Theophilus condemned by the Areopagus for forgery. From

thence sailing hastily through the Cyclades, and taking the shortest course, he

overtook Germanicus at Rhodes, but was there driven by a sudden tempest

upon the rocks: and Germanicus, who was not ignorant with what malignity

and invectives he was pursued, yet acted with so much humanity, that when

he might have left him to perish, and to casualty have referred the destruction

of  his  enemy;  he  despatched  galleys  to  rescue  him  from  the  wreck.  Thisgenerous kindness however assuaged not the animosity of Piso; and scarce

could he brook a day's delay with Germanicus, but left him in haste to arrive

in Syria before him: nor was he sooner there, and found himself amongst the

legions, than he began to court the common men by bounties and caresses, to

assist them with his countenance and credit, to form factions, to remove all

the  ancient  centurions  and  every  tribune  of  remarkable  discipline  and

severity,  and,  in  their  places,  to  put  dependents  of  his  own,  or  men

recommended  only  by  their  crimes;  he  permitted  sloth  in  the  camp,

licentiousness in the towns, a rambling and disorderly soldiery, and carried

the corruption so high, that in the discourses of the herd, he was styled Father

of the Legions. Nor did Plancina restrain herself to a conduct seemly in her

sex, but frequented the exercises of the cavalry, and attended the decursions

of the cohorts; everywhere inveighing against Agrippina, everywhere against

Germanicus; and some even of the most deserving soldiers became prompt to

base  obedience,  from  a  rumour  whispered  abroad,  "that  all  this  was  not

unacceptable to Tiberius,"

 
These doings were all known to Germanicus; but his more instant care was to

visit  Armenia,  an  inconstant  and  restless  nation  this  from  the  beginning;

inconstant from the genius of the people, as well as from the situation of their

country,  which  bordering  with  a  large  frontier  on  our  provinces,  and

stretching thence quite to Media, is enclosed between the two great Empires,

and often at variance with them; with the Romans through antipathy and

hatred, with the Parthians through competition and envy. At this time and

ever since the removal of Vonones, they had no king; but the affections of the

nations  leaned  to  Zeno,  son  of  Polemon,  king  of  Pontus,  because  by  an

attachment, from his infancy, to the fashions and customs of the Armenians,

by hunting, feasting, and other usages practised and renowned amongst the

barbarians,  he  had  equally  won  the  nobles  and  people.  Upon  his  head

therefore, at the city of Artaxata, with the approbation of the nobles, in a

great assembly, Germanicus put the regal diadem; and the Armenians doing

homage to their king, saluted him, Artaxias, a name which from that of their

city, they gave him. The Cappadocians, at this time reduced into the form of a

province, received for their governor Quintus Veranius; and to raise their

hopes  of  the  gentler  dominion  of  Rome,  several  of  the  royal  taxes  were

lessened.  Quintus  Servaeus  was  set  over  the  Comagenians,  then  first

subjected to the jurisdiction of a Praetor. 
From the affairs of the allies, thus all successfully settled, Germanicus reaped

no pleasure, through the perverseness and pride of Piso, who was ordered to

lead  by  himself  or  his  son,  part  of  the  legions  into  Armenia,  but

contemptuously neglected to do either. They at last met at Cyrrum, the winter

quarters of the tenth legion, whither each came with a prepared countenance;

Piso to betray no fear, and Germanicus would not be thought to threaten. He

was indeed, as I have observed, of a humane and reconcilable spirit: but,

officious friends expert at inflaming animosities, aggravated real offences,

added fictitious, and with manifold imputations charged Piso, Plancina, and

their sons. To this interview Germanicus admitted a few intimates, and began

his complaints in words such as dissembled resentment dictates. Piso replied

with disdainful submissions; and they parted in open enmity. Piso hereafter

came rarely to the tribunal of Germanicus; or, if he did, sate sternly there, and

in  manifest  opposition:  he  likewise  published  his  spite  at  a  feast  of  the

Nabathean King's, where golden crowns of great weight were presented to

Germanicus and Agrippina; but to Piso and the rest, such as were light: "This

banquet," he said, "was made for the son of a Roman prince, not of a Parthian

monarch:"  with  these  words,  he  cast  away  his  crown,  and  uttered  many

invectives  against  luxury:  sharp  insults  and  provocations  these  to

Germanicus; yet he bore them.

 
In  the  consulship  of  Marcus  Silanus  and  Lucius  Norbanus,  Germanicus

travelled to Egypt, to view the famous antiquities of the country; though for

the  motives  of  the  journey,  the  care  and  inspection  of  the  province  were

publicly alleged: and, indeed, by opening the granaries, he mitigated the price

of corn, and practised many things grateful to the people; walking without

guards, his feet bare, and his habit the same with that of the Greeks; after the

example  of  Publius  Scipio,  who,  we  are  told,  was  constant  in  the  same

practices in Sicily, even during the rage of the Punic War there. For these his

assumed manners and foreign habit, Tiberius blamed him in a gentle style,

but  censured  him  with  great  asperity  for  violating  an  establishment  of

Augustus,  and  entering  Alexandria  without  consent  of  the  Prince.  For

Augustus,  amongst  other  secrets  of  power,  had  appropriated  Egypt,  and

restrained  the  senators,  and  dignified  Roman  knights  from  going  thither

without licence; as he apprehended that Italy might be distressed with famine

by any who seized that province, the key to the Empire by sea and land, and

defensible by a light band of men against potent armies. 
Germanicus, not yet informed that his journey was censured, sailed up the

Nile, beginning at Canopus, [Footnote: Near Aboukir.] one of its mouths: it

was built by the Spartans, as a monument to Canopus, a pilot buried there, at

the time when Menelaus returning to Greece was driven to different seas and

the Lybian continent. Hence he visited the next mouth of the river sacred to

Hercules: him the nations aver to have been born amongst them; that he was

the most ancient of the name, and that all the rest, who with equal virtue

followed his example, were, in honour, called after him. Next he visited the

mighty antiquities of ancient Thebes; [Footnote: Karnak and Luxor.] where

upon huge obelisks yet remained Egyptian characters, describing its former

opulency: one of the oldest priests was ordered to interpret them; he said they

related "that it once contained seven hundred thousand fighting men; that

with that army King Rhamses had conquered Lybia, Ethiopia, the Medes and

Persians,  the  Bactrians  and  Scythians;  and  to  his  Empire  had  added  the

territories of the Syrians, Armenians, and their neighbours the Cappadocians;

a tract of countries reaching from the sea of Bithynia to that of Lycia:" here

also  was  read  the  assessment  of  tribute  laid  on  the  several  nations;  what

weight of silver and gold; what number of horses and arms; what ivory and

perfumes, as gifts to the temples; what measures of grain; what quantities of

all necessaries, were by each people paid; revenues equally grand with those

exacted by the denomination of the Parthians, or by the power of the Romans.

 
Germanicus  was  intent  upon  seeing  other  wonders:  the  chief  were;  the

effigies of Memnon, a colossus of stone, yielding when struck by the solar

rays, a vocal sound; the Pyramids rising, like mountains, amongst rolling and

almost impassable waves of sand; monuments these of the emulation and

opulency  of  Egyptian  kings;  the  artificial  lake,  a  receptacle  of  the

overflowing Nile; and elsewhere abysses of such immense depth, that those,

who  tried,  could  never  fathom.  Thence  he  proceeded  to  Elephantina  and

Syene, two islands, formerly frontiers of the Roman empire, which is now

widened to the Red Sea.

 
Whilst  Germanicus  spent  this  summer  in  several  provinces,  Drusus  was

sowing feuds amongst the Germans, and thence reaped no light renown; and,

as the power of Maroboduus was already broken, he engaged them to persist

and complete his ruin. Amongst the Gotones was a young man of quality, his

name Catualda, a fugitive long since from the violence of Maroboduus, butnow in his distress, resolved on revenge: hence with a stout band, he entered

the  borders  of  the  Marcomannians,  and  corrupting  their  chiefs  into  his

alliance, stormed the regal palace, and the castle situate near it. In the pillage

were found the ancient stores of prey accumulated by the Suevians; as also

many victuallers and traders from our provinces; men who were drawn hither

from  their  several  homes,  first  by  privilege  of  traffic,  then  retained  by  a

passion  to  multiply  gain,  and  at  last,  through  utter  oblivion  of  their  own

country, fixed, like natives, in a hostile soil.

 
To Maroboduus on every side forsaken, no other refuge remained but the

mercy  of  Caesar:  he  therefore  passed  the  Danube  where  it  washes  the

province of Norica, and wrote to Tiberius; not however in the language of a

fugitive or supplicant, but with a spirit suitable to his late grandeur, "that

many  nations  invited  him  to  them,  as  a  king  once  so  glorious;  but  he

preferred to all the friendship of Rome." The Emperor answered, "that in Italy

he should have a safe and honourable retreat, and, when his affairs required

his presence, the same security to return." But to the Senate he declared, "that

never had Philip of Macedon been so terrible to the Athenians; nor Pyrrhus,

nor Antiochus to the Roman people." The speech is extant: in it he magnifies

"the  greatness  of  the  man,  the  fierceness  and  bravery  of  the  nations  his

subjects; the alarming nearness of such an enemy to Italy, and his own artful

measures to destroy him." Maroboduus was kept at Ravenna, for a check and

terror to the Suevians; as if, when at any time they grew turbulent, he were

there in readiness to recover their subjection: yet in eighteen years he left not

Italy,  but  grew  old  in  exile  there;  his  renown  too  became  eminently

diminished; such was the price he paid for an over-passionate love of life.

The  same  fate  had  Catualda,  and  no  other  sanctuary;  he  was  soon  after

expulsed  by  the  forces  of  the  Hermundurans  led  by  Vibilius,  and  being

received  under  the  Roman  protection,  was  conveyed  to  Forum  Julium,  a

colony in Narbon Gaul. The barbarians their followers, lest, had they been

mixed with the provinces, they might have disturbed their present quiet, were

placed beyond the Danube, between the rivers Marus and Cusus, and for their

king had assigned them Vannius, by nation a Quadian.

 
As soon as it was known at Rome, that Artaxias was by Germanicus given to

the Armenians for their king, the fathers decreed to him and Drusus the lesser

triumph: triumphal arches were likewise erected, on each side of the Temple

of Mars the Avenger, supporting the statues of these two Caesars; and forTiberius, he was more joyful to have established peace by policy, than if by

battles and victories he had ended the war.

 
Germanicus returning from Egypt, learned that all his orders left with the

legions,  and  the  eastern  cities,  were  either  entirely  abolished,  or  contrary

regulations established: a ground this for his severe reproaches and insults

upon Piso. Nor less keen were the efforts and machinations of Piso against

Germanicus; yet Piso afterwards determined to leave Syria, but was detained

by the following illness of Germanicus: again when he heard of his recovery,

and perceived that vows were paid for his restoration; the Lictors, by his

command, broke the solemnity, drove away the victims already at the altars;

overturned the apparatus of the sacrifice; and scattered the people of Antioch

employed in celebrating the festival. He then departed to Seleucia, waiting

the event of the malady which had again assaulted Germanicus. His own

persuasion  too,  that  poison  was  given  him  by  Piso,  heightened  the  cruel

vehemence  of  the  disease:  indeed,  upon  the  floors  and  walls  were  found

fragments  of  human  bodies,  the  spoils  of  the  grave;  with  charms  and

incantations; and the name of Germanicus graved on sheets of lead; carcasses

half burnt, besmeared with gore; and other witchcrafts, by which souls are

thought  doomed  to  the  infernal  gods:  besides  there  were  certain  persons,

charged  as  creatures  of  Piso,  purposely  sent  and  employed  to  watch  the

progress and efforts of the disease.

 
These things filled Germanicus with apprehensions great as his resentment:

"If his doors," he said, "were besieged, if under the eyes of his enemies he

must render up his spirit, what was to be expected to his unhappy wife, what

to his infant children?" The progress of poison was thought too slow; Piso

was impatient, and urging with eagerness to command alone the legions, to

possess alone the province: but Germanicus was not sunk to such lowness

and impotence, that the price of his murder should remain with the murderer:

and  by  a  letter  to  Piso,  he  renounced  his  friendship:  some  add,  that  he

commanded him to depart the province. Nor did Piso tarry longer, but took

ship;  yet  checked  her  sailing  in  order  to  return  with  the  more  quickness,

should the death of Germanicus the while leave the government of Syria

vacant.

 
Germanicus, after a small revival, drooping again; when his end approached,

spoke on this wise to his attending friends: "Were I to yield to the destiny ofnature; just, even then, were my complaints against the Gods, for hurrying me

from my parents, my children, and my country, by a hasty death, in the prime

of life: now shortened in my course by the malignity of Piso, and his wife, to

your breasts I commit my last prayers: tell my father, tell my brother, with

what violent persecutions afflicted, with what mortal snares circumvented, I

end a most miserable life by death of all others the worst. All they whose

hopes in my fortune, all they whose kindred blood, and even they whose

envy, possessed them with impressions about me whilst living, shall bewail

me dead; that once great in glory, and surviving so many wars, I fell at last by

the dark devices of a woman. To you will be place left to complain in the

Senate,  and  place  to  invoke  the  aid  and  vengeance  of  the  laws.  To

commemorate the dead with slothful wailings, is not the principal office of

friends: they are to remember his dying wishes, to fulfil his last desires. Even

strangers will lament Germanicus: you are my friends: if you loved me rather

than  my  fortune,  you  will  vindicate  your  friendship:  show  the  people  of

Rome my wife, her who is the grand-daughter of Augustus, and enumerate to

them our six children. Their compassion will surely attend you who accuse;

and the accused, if they pretend clandestine warrants of iniquity, will not be

believed; if believed, not pardoned." His friends, as a pledge of their fidelity,

touching the hand of the dying prince, swore that they would forego their

lives sooner than their revenge. Then turning to his wife, he besought her

"that in tenderness to his memory, in tenderness to their common children,

she would banish her haughty spirit, yield to her hostile fortune, nor, upon

her return to Rome, by an impotent competition for ruling, irritate those who

were masters of rule." So much openly, and more in secret; whence he was

believed to have warned her of guile and danger from Tiberius. Soon after he

expired, to the heavy sorrow of the province, and of all the neighbouring

countries; insomuch that remote nations and foreign kings were mourners:

such had been his complacency to our confederates; such his humanity to his

enemies! Alike venerable he was, whether you saw him or heard him; and

without ever departing from the grave port and dignity of his sublime rank,

he yet lived destitute of arrogance and untouched by envy.

 
The funeral, which was performed without exterior pomp or a procession of

images, drew its solemnity from the loud praises and amiable memory of his

virtues. There were those who from his loveliness, his age, his manner of

dying, and even from the proximity of places where both departed, comparedhim in the circumstances of his fate, to Great Alexander: "Each of a graceful

person, each of illustrious descent; in years neither much exceeding thirty;

both victims to the malice and machinations of their own people, in the midst

of foreign nations: but Germanicus gentle towards his friends; his pleasures

moderate;  confined  to  one  wife;  all  his  children  by  one  bed;  nor  less  a

warrior, though not so rash, and however hindered from a final reduction of

Germany, broken by him in so many victories, and ready for the yoke: so that

had he been sole arbiter of things, had he acted with the sovereignty and title

of  royalty,  he  had  easier  overtaken  him  in  the  glory  of  conquests,  as  he

surpassed him in clemency, in moderation, and in other virtues." His body,

before  its  commitment  to  the  pile,  was  exhibited  naked  in  the  Forum  of

Antioch, the place where the pile was erected: whether it bore the marks of

poison,  remained  undecided:  for,  people  as  they  were  divided  in  their

affections, as they pitied Germanicus, and presumed the guilt of Piso, or were

partial to him, gave opposite accounts.

 
It was next debated amongst the legates of the legions and the other senators

there, to whom should be committed the administration of Syria: and after the

faint effort of others, it was long disputed between Vibius Marsus and Cneius

Sentius:  Marsus  at  last  yielded  to  Sentius,  the  older  man  and  the  more

vehement competitor. By him one Martina, infamous in that province for

practices in poisoning, and a close confidant of Plancina, was sent to Rome,

at the suit of Vitellius, Veranius, and others, who were preparing criminal

articles against Piso and Plancina, as against persons evidently guilty.

 
Agrippina, though overwhelmed with sorrow, and her body indisposed, yet

impatient  of  all  delays  to  her  revenge,  embarked  with  the  ashes  of

Germanicus, and her children; attended with universal commiseration, "that a

lady, in quality a princess, wont to be beheld in her late splendid wedlock

with  applauses  and  adorations,  was  now  seen  bearing  in  her  bosom  her

husband's funeral urn, uncertain of vengeance for him and fearful for herself;

unfortunate in her fruitfulness, and from so many children obnoxious to so

many blows of fortune." Piso the while was overtaken at the Isle of Coös by a

message,  "that  Germanicus  was  deceased,"  and  received  it  intemperately,

slew victims and repaired with thanksgiving to the temples: and yet, however

immoderate and undisguised was his joy, more arrogant and insulting proved

that of Plancina, who immediately threw off her mourning, which for the

death  of  a  sister  she  wore,  and  assumed  a  dress  adapted  to  gaiety  andgladness.

 
About him flocked the Centurions with officious representations, "that upon

him  particularly  were  bent  the  affections  and  zeal  of  the  legions,  and  he

should proceed to resume the province, at first injuriously taken from him

and now destitute of a governor." As he therefore consulted what he had best

pursue, his son Marcus Piso advised "a speedy journey to Rome: hitherto," he

said, "nothing past expiation was committed; nor were impotent suspicions to

be dreaded; nor the idle blazonings of fame: his variance and contention with

Germanicus was perhaps subject to hate and aversion, but to no prosecution

or penalty; and, by bereaving him of the province, his enemies were gratified:

but if he returned thither, as Sentius would certainly oppose him with arms, a

civil war would thence be actually begun: neither would the Centurions and

soldiers persist in his party; men with whom the recent memory of their late

commander,  and  an  inveterate  love  to  the  Caesarian  general,  were  still

prevalent."

 
Domitius Celer, one in intimate credit with Piso, argued on the contrary, "that

the present event must by all means be improved; it was Piso and not Sentius

who  had  commission  to  govern  Syria;  upon  him,  were  conferred  the

jurisdiction  of  Praetor,  and  the  badges  of  magistracy,  and  with  him  the

legions were instructed: so that if acts of hostility were by his opponents

attempted, with how much better warrant could he avow assuming arms in

his own right and defence, who was thus vested with the authority of general,

and acted under special orders from the Emperor. Rumours too were to be

neglected, and left to perish with time: in truth to the sallies and violence of

recent hate the innocent were often unequal: but were he once possessed of

the army, and had well augmented his forces, many things, not to be foreseen,

would from fortune derive success. Are we then preposterously hastening to

arrive  at  Rome  with  the  ashes  of  Germanicus,  that  you  may  there  fall,

unheard and undefended, a victim to the wailings of Agrippina, a prey to the

passionate populace governed by the first impressions of rumour? Livia, it is

true,  is  your  confederate;  Tiberius  is  your  friend;  but  both  secretly:  and

indeed none will more pompously bewail the violent fate of Germanicus,

than such as for it do most sincerely rejoice."

 
Piso  of  himself  prompt  to  violent  pursuits,  was  with  no  great  labour

persuaded into this opinion, and, in a letter transmitted to Tiberius, accusedGermanicus "of luxury and pride: that for himself, he had been expulsed, to

leave room for dangerous designs against the State, and now resumed, with

his former faith and loyalty, the care of the army." In the meantime he put

Domitius on board a galley, and ordered him to avoid appearing upon the

coasts or amongst the isles, but, through the main sea, to sail to Syria. The

deserters, who from all quarters were flocking to him in crowds, he formed

into companies, and armed all the retainers to the camp; then sailing over to

the continent, intercepted a regiment of recruits, upon their march into Syria;

and wrote to the small kings of Cilicia to assist him with present succours:

nor was the younger Piso slow in prosecuting all the measures of war, though

to adventure a war had been against his sentiments and advice.

 
As  they  coasted  Lycia  and  Pamphilia,  they  encountered  the  ships  which

carried Agrippina, with hostile spirit on each side, and each at first prepared

for combat; but as equal dread of one another possessed both, proceeded not

further than mutual contumelies. Vibius Marsus particularly summoned Piso,

as a criminal, to Rome, there to make his defence: he answered with derision

"that when the Praetor, who was to sit upon poisonings, had assigned a day to

the accusers and the accused, he would attend." Domitius, the while, landing

at Laodicea, a city of Syria, would have proceeded to the winter quarters of

the sixth legion, which he believed to be the most prone to engage in novel

attempts, but was prevented by Pacuvius, its commander. Sentius represented

this by letter to Piso, and warned him, "at his peril to infect the camp by

ministers of corruption; or to assail the province of war;" and drew into a

body such as he knew loved Germanicus, or such as were averse to his foes:

upon them he inculcated with much ardour, that Piso was with open arms

attacking the majesty of the Prince, and invading the Roman State; and then

marched at the head of a puissant body, equipped for battle and resolute to

engage.

 
Neither failed Piso, though his enterprises had thus far miscarried, to apply

the securest remedies to his present perplexities; and therefore seized a castle

of Cilicia strongly fortified, its name Celendris: for, to the auxiliary Cilicians,

sent him by the petty kings, he had joined his body of deserters, as also the

recruits lately intercepted, with all his own and Plancina's slaves; and thus in

number  and  bulk  had  of  the  whole  composed  a  legion.  To  them  he  thus

harangued: "I who am the lieutenant of Caesar, am yet violently excluded

from the province which to me Caesar has committed: not excluded by thelegions  (for  by  their  invitation  I  am  arrived),  but  by  Sentius,  who  thus

disguises under feigned crimes against me, his own animosity and personal

hate: but with confidence you may stand in battle, where the opposite army,

upon the sight of Piso, a commander lately by themselves styled their Father,

will certainly refuse to fight; they know too, that were right to decide it, I am

the stronger; and of no mean puissance in a trial at arms." He then arrayed his

men without the fortifications, on a hill steep and craggy, for all the rest was

begirt by the sea: against them stood the veterans regularly embattled, and

supported with a body of reserve; so that here appeared the force of men,

there only the terror and stubbornness of situation. On Piso's side was no

spirit, nor hope, nor even weapons save those of rustics, for instant necessity

hastily acquired. As soon as they came to blows, the issue was no longer

doubtful than while the Roman cohorts struggled up the steep: the Cilicians

then fled, and shut themselves up in the castle.

 
Piso having the while attempted in vain to storm the fleet, which rode at a

small distance, as soon as he returned, presented himself upon the walls;

where,  by  a  succession  of  passionate  complaints  and  entreaties,  now

bemoaning  in  agonies  the  bitterness  of  his  lot,  then  calling  and  cajolling

every  particular  soldier  by  his  name,  and  by  rewards  tempting  all,  he

laboured to excite a sedition; and thus much had already effected, that the

Eagle-bearer of the sixth legion revolted to him with his Eagle. This alarmed

Sentius, and instantly he commanded the cornets and trumpets to sound, a

mound to be raised, the ladders placed, and the bravest men to mount, and

others  to  pour  from  the  engines  volleys  of  darts  and  stones,  and  flaming

torches. The obstinacy of Piso was at last vanquished; and he desired "that

upon delivering his arms he might remain in the castle till the Emperor's

pleasure, to whom he would commit the government of Syria, were known;"

conditions which were not accepted; nor was aught granted him save ships

and a passport to Rome.

 
After the illness of Germanicus grew current there, and all its circumstances,

like rumours magnified by distance, were related with many aggravations;

sadness seized the people; they burned with indignation, and even poured out

in  plaints  the  anguish  of  their  souls.  "For  this,"  they  said,  "he  had  been

banished to the extremities of the Empire, for this the province of Syria was

committed to Piso, and these the fruits of Livia's mysterious conferences with

Plancina: truly had our fathers spoken concerning his father Drusus; that thepossessors of rule beheld with an evil eye the popular spirit of their sons; nor

for aught else were they sacrificed, but for their equal treatment of the Roman

People, and studying to restore the popular state." These lamentations of the

populace  were,  upon  the  tidings  of  his  death,  so  inflamed,  that,  without

staying for an edict from the magistrates, without a decree of Senate, they by

general consent assumed a vacation; the public courts were deserted, private

houses  shut  up,  prevalent  everywhere  were  the  symptoms  of  woe,  heavy

groans, dismal silence; the whole a scene of real sorrow, and nothing devised

for form or show; and, though they forbore not to bear the exterior marks and

habiliments  of  mourning;  in  their  souls  they  mourned  still  deeper.

Accidentally some merchants from Syria, who had left Germanicus still alive,

brought more joyful news of his condition: these were instantly believed, and

instantly  proclaimed:  each,  as  fast  as  they  met,  informed  others,  who

forthwith  conveyed  their  light  information  with  improvements  and

accumulated joy to more, and all flew with exultation through the city; and,

to pay their thanks and vows, burst open the temple doors: the night too

heightened their credulity, and affirmation was bolder in the dark. Nor did

Tiberius restrain the course of these fictions, but left them to vanish with

time: hence with more bitterness they afterwards grieved for him, as if anew

snatched from them.

 
Honours were invented and decreed to Germanicus, various as the affections

and genius of the particular Senators who proposed them: "that his name

should be sung in the Salian hymns; curule chairs placed for him amongst the

priests of Augustus, and over these chairs oaken crowns hung; his statue in

ivory precede in the Cercensian games; none but one of the Julian race be, in

the room of Germanicus, created flamen or augur:" triumphal arches were

added; one at Rome; one upon the banks of the Rhine; one upon Mount

Amanus,  in  Syria;  with  inscriptions  of  his  exploits,  and  a  testimony

subjoined,  "that  he  died  for  the  Commonwealth:"  a  sepulchre  at  Antioch,

where  his  corpse  was  burnt;  a  tribunal  at  Epidaphne,  the  place  where  he

ended  his  life.  The  multitude  of  statues,  the  many  places  where  divine

honours were appointed to be paid him, would not be easily recounted. They

would have also decreed him, as to one of the masters of eloquence, a golden

shield,  signal  in  bulk  as  in  metal;  but  Tiberius  offered  to  dedicate  one

himself, such as was usual and of a like size with others; for that eloquence

was not measured by fortune; and it was sufficient glory, if he were rankedwith ancient writers. The battalion called after the name of the Junii was now,

by the equestrian order, entitled the battalion of Germanicus, and a rule made

that, on every fifteenth of July, these troops should follow, as their standard,

the  effigies  of  Germanicus:  of  these  honours  many  continue;  some  were

instantly omitted, or by time are utterly obliterated.

 
In the height of this public sorrow, Livia, sister to Germanicus, and married

to Drusus, was delivered of male twins: an event even in middling families,

rare and acceptable, and to Tiberius such mighty matter of joy, that he could

not refrain boasting to the fathers, "that to no Roman of the same eminence,

before him, were never two children born at a birth:" for to his own glory he

turned all things, even things fortuitous. But to the people, at such a sad

conjuncture, it brought fresh anguish; as they feared that the family of Drusus

thus increased, would press heavy upon that of Germanicus.

 
The same year the lubricity of women was by the Senate restrained with

severe laws; and it was provided, "that no woman should become venal, if her

father, grandfather or husband, were Roman knights." For Vistilia, a lady

born  of  a  Praetorian  family,  had  before  the  Aediles  published  herself  a

prostitute;  upon  a  custom  allowed  by  our  ancestors,  who  thought  that

prostitutes were by thus avowing their infamy, sufficiently punished. Titidius

Labeo  too  was  questioned,  that  in  the  manifest  guilt  of  his  wife,  he  had

neglected the punishment prescribed by the law; but he alleged that the sixty

days allowed for consultation were not elapsed; and it was deemed sufficient

to  proceed  against  Vistilia,  who  was  banished  to  the  Isle  of  Seriphos.

Measures were also taken for exterminating the solemnities of the Jews and

Egyptians; and by decree of Senate four thousand descendants of franchised

slaves, all defiled with that superstition, but of proper strength and age, were

to be transported to Sardinia; to restrain the Sardinian robbers; and if, through

the malignity of the climate, they perished, despicable would be the loss: the

rest were doomed to depart Italy, unless by a stated day they renounced their

profane rites.

 
After this Tiberius represented that, to supply the place of Occia, who had

presided seven and fifty years with the highest sanctimony over the Vestals,

another virgin was to be chosen; and thanked Fonteius Agrippa and Asinius

Pollio,  that  by  offering  their  daughters,  they  contended  in  good  offices

towards the Commonwealth. Pollio's daughter was preferred; for nothing elsebut that her mother had ever continued in the same wedlock: for Agrippa, by

a divorce, had impaired the credit of his house: upon her who was postponed,

Tiberius, in consolation, bestowed for her fortune a thousand great sestertia.

 
As the people murmured at the severe dearth of corn, he settled grain at a

price certain to the buyer, and undertook to pay fourteenpence a measure to

the seller: neither yet would he accept the name of Father of his Country, a

title offered him before, and for these bounties, now again; nay, he sharply

rebuked such as styled these provisions of his, divine occupations, and him,

Lord: hence freedom of speech became cramped and insecure, under such a

Prince; one who dreaded liberty, and abhorred flattery.

 
I find in the writers of those times, some of them Senators, that in the Senate

were read letters from Adgandestrius, prince of the Cattans, undertaking to

despatch Arminius, if in order to it poison were sent him; and an answer

returned, "that not by frauds and blows in the dark, but armed and in the face

of the sun, the Roman People took vengeance on their foes." In this Tiberius

gained equal glory with our ancient captains, who rejected and disclosed a

plot to poison King Pyrrhus. Arminius however, who upon the departure of

the Romans and expulsion of Maroboduus, aimed at royalty, became thence

engaged in a struggle against the liberty of his country; and, in defence of

their  liberty,  his  countrymen  took  arms  against  him:  so  that,  while  with

various fortune he contended with them, he fell by the treachery of his own

kindred: the deliverer of Germany without doubt he was; one who assailed

the Roman power, not like other kings and leaders, in its first elements, but in

its highest pride and elevation; one sometimes beaten in battle, but never

conquered in war: thirty-seven years he lived; twelve he commanded; and,

amongst  these  barbarous  nations,  his  memory  is  still  celebrated  in  their

songs; but his name unknown in the annals of the Greeks, who only admire

their own national exploits and renown; nor even amongst the Romans does

this  great  captain  bear  much  distinction,  while,  overlooking  instances  of

modern prowess and glory, we only delight to magnify men and feats of old.

 THE ANNALS:
BOOK Il

 
                                      BOOK III 
                                      A.D. 20-22.

 
Agrippina,  notwithstanding  the  roughness  of  winter,  pursuing  without

intermission her boisterous voyage, put in at the Island Corcyra, [Footnote:

Corfu.] situate over against the coasts of Calabria. Here to settle her spirit,

she spent a few days, violent in her grief, and a stranger to patience. Her

arrival  being  the  while  divulged,  all  the  particular  friends  to  her  family,

mostly men of the sword, many who had served under Germanicus, and even

many strangers from the neighbouring towns, some in officiousness towards

the Emperor, more for company, crowded to the city of Brundusium, the

readiest port in her way and the safest landing. As soon as the fleet appeared

in the deep, instantly were filled, not the port alone and adjacent shores, but

the walls and roofs, and as far as the eye could go; filled with the sorrowing

multitude. They were consulting one from one, how they should receive her

landing, "whether with universal silence, or with some note of acclamation."

Nor was it manifest which they would do, when the fleet stood slowly in, not

as usual with joyful sailors and cheerful oars, but all things impressed with

the face of sadness. After she descended from the ship, accompanied with her

two infants, carrying in her bosom the melancholy urn, with her eyes cast

steadily down; equal and universal were the groans of the beholders: nor

could you distinguish relations from strangers, nor the wailings of men from

those of women, unless that the new-comers, who were recent in their sallies

of  grief,  exceeded  Agrippina's  attendants,  wearied  out  with  long

lamentations.

 
Tiberius  had  despatched  two  Praetorian  cohorts,  with  directions,  that  the

magistrates of Calabria, Apulia and Campania, should pay their last offices to

the memory of his son: upon the shoulders therefore of the Tribunes and

Centurions  his  ashes  were  borne;  before  went  the  ensigns  rough  and

unadorned, with the fasces reversed. As they passed through the colonies, the

populace were in black, the knights in purple; and each place, according to its

wealth, burnt precious raiment, perfumes and whatever else is used in funeral

solemnities: even they whose cities lay remote attended: to the Gods of the

dead  they  slew  victims,  they  erected  altars,  and  with  tears  and  united

lamentations,  testified  their  common  sorrow.  Drusus  came  as  far  as

Terracina, with Claudius the brother of Germanicus, and those of his children

who  had  been  left  at  Rome.  The  Consuls  Marcus  Valerius  and  MarcusAurelius (just then entered upon their office), the Senate, and great part of the

people, filled the road; a scattered procession, each walking and weeping his

own way: in this mourning, flattery had no share; for all knew how real was

the joy, how hollow the grief, of Tiberius for the death of Germanicus.

 
Tiberius  and  Livia  avoided  appearing  abroad:  public  lamentation  they

thought  below  their  grandeur;  or  perhaps  they  apprehended  that  their

countenances,  examined  by  all  eyes,  might  show  deceitful  hearts.  That

Antonia, mother to the deceased, bore any part in the funeral, I do not find

either in the historians or in the city journals: though, besides Agrippina, and

Drusus,  and  Claudius,  his  other  relations  are  likewise  there  recorded  by

name:  whether  by  sickness  she  was  prevented;  or  whether  her  soul

vanquished by sorrow, could not bear the representation of such a mighty

calamity. I would rather believe her constrained by Tiberius and Livia, who

left not the palace; and affecting equal affliction with her, would have it seem

that,  by  the  example  of  the  mother,  the  grandmother  too  and  uncle  were

detained.

 
The day his remains were reposited in the tomb of Augustus, various were

the symptoms of public grief; now the vastness of silence; now the uproar of

lamentation; the city in every quarter full of processions; the field of Mars on

a blaze of torches: here the soldiers under arms, the magistrates without the

insignia,  the  people  by  their  tribes,  all  cried  in  concert  that  "the

Commonwealth was fallen, and henceforth there was no remain of hope;" so

openly and boldly that you would have believed they had forgot, who bore

sway. But nothing pierced Tiberius more than the ardent affections of the

people towards Agrippina, while such titles they gave her as "the ornament of

her  country,  the  only  blood  of  Augustus,  the  single  instance  of  ancient

virtue;" and, while applying to heaven, they implored "the continuance of her

issue, that they might survive the persecuting and malignant."

 
There were those who missed the pomp of a public funeral, and compared

with this the superior honours and magnificence bestowed by Augustus on

that of Drusus the father of Germanicus; "that he himself had travelled, in the

sharpness of winter, as far as Pavia, and thence, continuing by the corpse, had

with it entered the city; round his head were placed the images of the Claudii

and Julii; he was mourned in the Forum; his encomium pronounced in the

Rostras; all sorts of honours, such as were the inventions of our ancestors, orthe  improvements  of  their  posterity,  were  heaped  upon  him.  But  to

Germanicus were denied the ordinary solemnities, and such as were due to

every distinguished Roman. In a foreign country indeed, his corpse because

of the long journey, was burnt without pomp; but afterwards, it was but just

to have supplied the scantiness of the first ceremony by the solemnity of the

last: his brother met him but one day's journey; his uncle not even at the gate.

Where were those generous observations of the ancients; the effigies of the

dead borne on a bed, hymns composed in memory of their virtue, with the

oblations of praise and tears? Where at least were the ceremonies and even

outside of sorrow?"

 
All  this  was  known  to  Tiberius;  and,  to  suppress  the  discourses  of  the

populace, he published an edict, "that many illustrious Romans had died for

the Commonwealth, but none so vehemently lamented: this however was to

the glory of himself and of all men, if a measure were observed. The same

things which became private families and small states, became not Princes

and  an  Imperial  People:  fresh  grief  indeed  required  vent  and  ease  by

lamentation; but it was now time to recover and fortify their minds. Thus the

deified Julius, upon the loss of an only daughter; thus the deified Augustus,

upon the hasty death of his grandsons, had both vanquished their sorrow.

More  ancient  examples  were  unnecessary;  how  often  the  Roman  People

sustained  with  constancy  the  slaughter  of  their  armies,  the  death  of  their

generals, and entire destruction of their noblest families: Princes were mortal;

the Commonwealth was eternal: they should therefore resume their several

vocations." And because the Megalesian games were at hand, he added, "that

they should even apply to the usual festivities."

 
The vacation ended, public affairs were resumed; Drusus departed for the

army in Illyricum, and the minds of all men were bent upon seeing vengeance

done upon Piso. They repeated their resentments, that while he wandered

over  the  delightful  countries  of  Asia  and  Greece,  he  was  stifling,  by

contumacious and deceitful delays, the evidences of his crimes; for it was

bruited abroad, that Martina, she who was famous for poisonings, and sent, as

I have above related, by Cneius Sentius towards Rome, was suddenly dead at

Brundusium; that poison lay concealed in a knot of her hair, but upon her

body were found no symptoms of self-murder.

 
Piso, sending forward his son to Rome, with instructions how to soften theEmperor, proceeded himself to Drusus: him he hoped to find less rigid for the

death of a brother, than favourable for the removal of a rival. Tiberius, to

make  show  of  a  spirit  perfectly  unbiassed,  received  the  young  man

graciously, and honoured him with the presents usually bestowed on young

noblemen. The answer of Drusus to Piso was, "That if the current rumours

were true, he stood in the first place of grief and revenge; but he hoped they

were  false  and  chimerical,  and  that  the  death  of  Germanicus  would  be

pernicious to none." This he declared in public, and avoided all privacy: nor

was  it  doubted  but  the  answer  was  dictated  by  Tiberius;  when  a  youth,

otherwise easy and unwary, practised thus the wiles and cunning of age.

 
Piso having crossed the sea of Dalmatia, and left his ships at Ancona, took

first the road of Picenum and then the Flaminian way, following the legion

which was going from Pannonia to Rome, and thence to garrison in Africa.

This too became the subject of popular censure, that he officiously mixed

with the soldiers, and courted them in their march and quarters: he therefore,

to avoid suspicion; or, because when men are in dread, their conduct wavers,

did  at  Narni  embark  upon  the  Nar,  and  thence  sailed  into  the  Tiber.  By

landing at the burying-place of the Caesars, he heightened the wrath of the

populace: besides, he and Plancina came ashore, in open day, in the face of

the city who were crowding the banks, and proceeded with gay countenances;

he attended by a long band of clients, she by a train of ladies. There were yet

other provocations to hatred; the situation of his house, proudly overlooking

the Forum, and adorned and illuminated as for a festival; the banquet and

rejoicings held in it, and all as public as the place.

 
The  next  day  Fulcinius  Trio  arraigned  Piso  before  the  Consuls,  but  was

opposed  by  Vitellius,  Veranius,  and  others,  who  had  accompanied

Germanicus: they said, "that in this prosecution Trio had no part; nor did they

themselves act as accusers, but only gathered materials, and, as witnesses,

produced the last injunctions of Germanicus." Trio dropped that accusation;

but got leave to call in question his former life: and now the Emperor was

desired  to  undertake  the  trial;  a  request  which  the  accused  did  not  at  all

oppose, dreading the inclinations of the people and Senate: he knew Tiberius,

on  the  contrary,  resolute  in  despising  popular  rumours,  and  in  guilt

confederate with his mother: besides that truth and misrepresentations were

easiest distinguished by a single judge, but in assemblies odium and envy

often prevailed. Tiberius was aware of the weight of the trial, and with whatreproaches he was assaulted. Admitting therefore a few confidants, he heard

the charge of the accusers, as also the apology of the accused; and left the

cause entire to the Senate.

 
Drusus returned the while from Illyricum; and though the Senate had for the

reduction of Maroboduus, and other his exploits the summer before, decreed

him the triumph of ovation; he postponed the honour, and privately entered

the city. Piso, for his advocates, desired Titus Arruntius, Fulcinius, Asinius

Gallus,  Eserninus  Marcellus,  and  Sextus  Pompeius:  but  they  all  framed

different excuses; and he had, in their room, Marcus Lepidus, Lucius Piso

and Liveneius Regulus. Now earnest were the expectations of all men, "how

great  would  prove  the  fidelity  of  the  friends  of  Germanicus;  what  the

assurance of the criminal, what the behaviour of Tiberius; whether he would

sufficiently smother, or betray his sentiments." He never had a more anxious

part; neither did the people ever indulge themselves in such secret murmurs

against their Emperor, nor harbour in silence severer suspicions.

 
When the Senate met, Tiberius made a speech full of laboured moderation:

"That Piso had been his father's lieutenant and friend; and lately appointed by

himself,  at  the  direction  of  the  Senate,  coadjutor  to  Germanicus  in

administering the affairs of the East: whether he had there by contumacy and

opposition  exasperated  the  young  Prince,  and  exulted  over  his  death,  or

wickedly procured it, they were then to judge with minds unprejudiced. For,

if he who was the lieutenant of my son violated the limits of his commission,

cast off obedience to his general, and even rejoiced at his decease and at my

affliction; I will detest the man, I will banish him from my house, and for

domestic injuries exert domestic revenge; not the revenge of an Emperor. But

for you; if his guilt of any man's death whatsoever is discovered, show your

just  vengeance,  and  by  it  satisfy  yourselves,  satisfy  the  children  of

Germanicus,  and  us  his  father  and  grandmother.  Consider  too  especially,

whether he vitiated the discipline and promoted sedition in the army; whether

he  sought  to  debauch  the  affections  of  the  soldiers,  and  to  recover  the

province by arms: or whether these allegations are not published falsely and

with aggravations by the accusers, with whose over-passionate zeal, I am

justly offended: for, whither tended the stripping the corpse and exposing it to

the eyes and examination of the populace; with what view was it proclaimed

even to foreign nations, that his death was the effect of poison; if all this was

still doubtful, and remains yet to be tried? It is true I bewail my son, and shallever bewail him: but neither do I hinder the accused to do what in him lies to

manifest his innocence, even at the expense of Germanicus, if aught blamable

was in him. From you I entreat the same impartiality: let not the connection

of my sorrow with this cause, mislead you to take crimes for proved because

they  are  imputed.  For  Piso;  if  the  tenderness  of  kinsmen,  if  the  faith  of

friends, has furnished him with patrons, let them aid him in his peril, show

their utmost eloquence, and exert their best diligence. To the same pains, to

the same firmness I exhort the accusers. Thus much we will grant to the

memory of Germanicus, that the inquest concerning his death, be held rather

here than in the Forum, in the Senate than the common Tribunals. In all the

rest,  we  will  descend  to  the  ordinary  methods.  Let  no  man  in  this  cause

consider  Drusus's  tears;  let  none  regard  my  sorrow,  no  more  than  the

probable fictions of calumny against us."

 
Two days were then appointed for maintaining the charge; six for preparing

the defence, and three for making it. Fulcinius began with things stale and

impertinent, about the ambition and rapine of Piso in his administration of

Spain:  things  which,  though  proved,  brought  him  under  no  penalty,  if

acquitted of the present charge; nor, though he had been cleared of former

faults, could he escape the load of greater enormities. After him Servaeus,

Veranius, and Vitellius, all with equal zeal, but Vitellius with great eloquence

urged "that Piso, in hatred to Germanicus, and passionate for innovations, had

by  tolerating  general  licentiousness,  and  the  oppression  of  the  allies,

corrupted the common soldiers to that degree, that by the most profligate he

was styled Father of the Legions: he had, on the contrary, been outrageous to

the best men, above all to the friends and companions of Germanicus; and, at

last,  by  witchcraft  and  poison  destroyed  Germanicus  himself:  hence  the

infernal charms and immolations practised by him and Plancina: he had then

attacked the Commonwealth with open arms; and, before he could be brought

to be tried, they were forced to fight and defeat him."

 
In every article but one his defence was faltering. For, neither his dangerous

intrigues in debauching the soldiery, nor his abandoning the province to the

most profligate and rapacious, nor even his insults to Germanicus, were to be

denied. He seemed only to wipe off the charge of poison; a charge which in

truth was not sufficiently corroborated by the accusers, since they had only to

allege, "that at an entertainment of Germanicus, Piso, while he sat above him,

with his hands poisoned the meat." It appeared absurd that amongst so manyattending slaves besides his own, in so great a presence, and under the eye of

Germanicus, he would attempt it: he himself required that the waiters might

be racked, and offered to the rack his own domestics: but the Judges were

implacable, implacable from different motives; Tiberius for the war raised in

the  province;  and  the  Senate  could  never  be  convinced  that  the  death  of

Germanicus was not the effect of fraud. Some moved for the letters written to

Piso from Rome; a motion opposed by Tiberius no less than by Piso. From

without, at the same time, were heard the cries of the people, "that if he

escaped the judgment of the Senate, they would with their own hands destroy

him."  They  had  already  dragged  his  statues  to  the  place  from  whence

malefactors were precipitated, and there had broken them; but by the orders

of Tiberius they were rescued and replaced. Piso was put into a litter and

carried  back  by  a  tribune  of  a  Praetorian  cohort;  an  attendance  variously

understood, whether as a guard for his safety, or a minister of death.

 
Plancina was under equal public hatred, but had more secret favour: hence it

was doubted how far Tiberius durst proceed against her. For herself; while

her husband's hopes were yet plausible, she professed "she would accompany

his fortune, whatever it were, and, if he fell, fall with him." But when by the

secret solicitations of Livia, she had secured her own pardon, she began by

degrees to drop her husband, and to make a separate defence. After this fatal

warning, he doubted whether he should make any further efforts; but, by the

advice of his sons, fortifying his mind, he again entered the Senate: there he

found  the  prosecution  renewed,  suffered  the  declared  indignation  of  the

Fathers, and saw all things cross and terrible; but nothing so much daunted

him  as  to  behold  Tiberius,  without  mercy,  without  wrath,  close,  dark,

unmovable,  and  bent  against  every  access  of  tenderness.  When  he  was

brought home, as if he were preparing for his further defence the next day, he

wrote somewhat, which he sealed and delivered to his freedman: he then

washed and anointed, and took the usual care of his person. Late in the night,

his wife leaving the chamber, he ordered the door to be shut; and was found,

at break of day, with his throat cut, his sword lying by him.

 
I remember to have heard from ancient men, that in the hands of Piso was

frequently seen a bundle of writings, which he did not expose, but which, as

his friends constantly averred, "contained the letters of Tiberius and his cruel

orders towards Germanicus: that he resolved to lay them before the Fathers

and  to  charge  the  Emperor,  but  was  deluded  by  the  hollow  promises  ofSejanus: and that neither did Piso die by his own hands, but by those of an

express and private executioner." I dare affirm neither; nor yet ought I to

conceal the relations of such as still lived when I was a youth. Tiberius, with

an assumed air of sadness, complained to the Senate, that Piso, by that sort of

death, had aimed to load him with obloquy; and asked many questions how

he had passed his last day, how his last night? The freedman answered to

most with prudence, to some in confusion. The Emperor then recited the

letter sent him by Piso. It was conceived almost in these words: "Oppressed

by a combination of my enemies and the imputation of false crimes; since no

place is left here to truth and my innocence; to the Immortal Gods I appeal,

that towards you, Caesar, I have lived with sincere faith, nor towards your

mother with less reverence. For my sons I implore her protection and yours:

my son Cneius had no share in my late management whatever it were, since,

all the while, he abode at Rome: and my son Marcus dissuaded me from

returning to Syria. Oh that, old as I am, I had yielded to him, rather than he,

young as he is, to me! Hence more passionately I pray that innocent as he is,

he suffer not in the punishment of my guilt: by a series of services for five-

and-forty years, I entreat you; by our former fellowship in the consulship; by

the memory of the deified Augustus, your father; by his friendship to me; by

mine to you, I entreat you for the life and fortune of my unhappy son. It is the

last request I shall ever make you." Of Plancina he said nothing.

 
Tiberius, upon this, cleared the young man of any crime as to the civil war:

he  alleged  "the  orders  of  his  father,  which  a  son  could  not  disobey."  He

likewise  bewailed  "that  noble  house,  and  even  the  grievous  lot  of  Piso

himself, however deserved," For Plancina he pleaded with shame and guilt,

alleging the importunity of his mother; against whom more particularly the

secret murmurs of the best people waxed bitter and poignant. "Was it then the

tender  part  of  a  grandmother  to  admit  to  her  sight  the  murderess  of  her

grandson, to be intimate with her, and to snatch her from the vengeance of

the Senate? To Germanicus alone was denied what by the laws was granted

to  every  citizen.  By  Vitellius  and  Veranius,  the  cause  of  that  prince  was

mourned  and  pleaded:  by  the  Emperor  and  his  mother,  Plancina  was

defended  and  protected.  Henceforth  she  might  pursue  her  infernal  arts  so

successfully tried, repeat her poisonings, and by her arts and poisons assail

Agrippina and her children; and, with the blood of that most miserable house,

satiate the worthy grandmother and uncle." In this mock trial two days werewasted; Tiberius, all the while, animating the sons of Piso to defend their

mother: when the pleaders and witnesses had vigorously pushed the charge,

and no reply was made, commiseration prevailed over hatred. The Consul

Aurelius Cotta was first asked his opinion: for, when the Emperor collected

the voices, the magistrates likewise voted. Cotta's sentence was, "that the

name of Piso should be razed from the annals, part of his estate forfeited, part

granted  to  his  son  Cneius,  upon  changing  that  name;  his  son  Marcus  be

divested of his dignity, and content with fifty thousand great sestertia, be

banished for ten years: and to Plancina, at the request of Livia, indemnity

should be granted."

 
Much  of  this  sentence  was  abated  by  the  Emperor;  particularly  that  of

striking Piso's name out of the annals, when "that of Marc Anthony, who

made war upon his country; that of Julius Antonius, who had by adultery

violated  the  house  of  Augustus,  continued  still  there."  He  also  exempted

Marcus  Piso  from  the  ignominy  of  degradation,  and  left  him  his  whole

paternal inheritance; for, as I have already often observed, he was to the

temptations of money incorruptible, and from the shame of having acquitted

Plancina, rendered then more than usually mild. He likewise withstood the

motion of Valerius Messalinus, "for erecting a golden statue in the Temple of

Mars the Avenger;" and that of Caecina Severus, "for founding an altar to

revenge." "Such monuments as these," he argued, "were only fit to be raised

upon  foreign  victories;  domestic  evils  were  to  be  buried  in  sadness."

Messalinus  had  added,  "that  to  Tiberius,  Livia,  Antonia,  Agrippina  and

Drusus, public thanks were to be rendered for having revenged the death of

Germanicus;" but had omitted to mention Claudius. Messalinus was asked by

Lucius Asprenas, in the presence of the Senate, "Whether by design he had

omitted him?" and then at last the name of Claudius was subjoined. To me,

the more I revolve the events of late or of old, the more of mockery and

slipperiness appears in all human wisdom and the transactions of men: for, in

popular fame, in the hopes, wishes and veneration of the public, all men were

rather destined to the Empire, than he for whom fortune then reserved the

sovereignty in the dark.

 
A  few  days  after,  Vitellius,  Veranius  and  Servaeus,  were  by  the  Senate

preferred to the honours of the Priesthood, at the motion of Tiberius. To

Fulcinius  he  promised  his  interest  and  suffrage  towards  preferment,  but

advised him "not to embarrass his eloquence by impetuosity." This was theend of revenging the death of Germanicus; an affair ambiguously related, not

by those only who then lived and interested themselves in it, but likewise the

following times: so dark and intricate are all the highest transactions; while

some hold for certain facts, the most precarious hearsays; others turn facts

into falsehood; and both are swallowed and improved by the credulity of

posterity. Drusus went now without the city, there to renew the ceremony of

the auspices, and presently re-entered in the triumph of ovation. A few days

after died Vipsania his mother; of all the children of Agrippa, the only one

who made a pacific end: the rest manifestly perished, or are believed to have

perished, by the sword, poison, or famine.

 
The qualifying of the Law Papia Poppaea was afterwards proposed; a law

which, to enforce those of Julius Caesar, Augustus had made when he was

old, for punishing celibacy and enriching the Exchequer. Nor even by this

means had marriages and children multiplied, while a passion to live single

and childless prevailed: but, in the meantime, the numbers threatened and in

danger  by  it  increased  daily,  while  by  the  glosses  and  chicane  of  the

impleaders every family was undone. So that, as before the city laboured

under the weight of crimes, so now under the pest of laws. From this thought

I am led backwards to the first rise of laws, and to open the steps and causes

by which we are arrived to the present number and excess; a number infinite

and perplexed.

 
The first race of men, free as yet from every depraved passion, lived without

guile and crimes, and therefore without chastisements or restraints; nor was

there  occasion  for  rewards,  when  of  their  own  accord  they  pursued

righteousness:  and  as  they  courted  nothing  contrary  to  justice,  they  were

debarred from nothing by terrors. But, after they had abandoned their original

equality, and from modesty and shame to do evil, proceeded to ambition and

violence; lordly dominion was introduced and arbitrary rule, and in many

nations grew perpetual. Some, either from the beginning, or after they were

surfeited with kings, preferred the sovereignty of laws; which, agreeable to

the artless minds of men, were at first short and simple. The laws in most

renown were those framed for the Cretans by Minos; for the Spartans by

Lycurgus;  and  afterwards  such  as  Solon  delivered  to  the  Athenians,  now

greater in number and more exquisitely composed. To the Romans justice

was administered by Romulus according to his pleasure: after him, Numa

managed the people by religious devices and laws divine. Some institutionswere made by Tullus Hostilius, some by Ancus Martius; but above all our

laws were those founded by Servius Tullius; they were such as even our

kings were bound to obey.

 
Upon the expulsion of Tarquin; the people, for the security of their freedom

against  the  encroachment  and  factions  of  the  Senate,  and  for  binding  the

public  concord,  prepared  many  ordinances:  hence  were  created  the

Decemviri, and by them were composed the twelve tables, out of a collection

of the most excellent institutions found abroad. The period this of all upright

and  impartial  laws.  What  laws  followed,  though  sometimes  made  against

crimes  and  offenders,  were  yet  chiefly  made  by  violence,  through  the

animosity of the two Estates, and for seizing unjustly withholden offices or

continuing unjustly in them, or for banishing illustrious patriots, and to other

wicked ends. Hence the Gracchi and Saturnini, inflamers of the people; and

hence Drusus vying, on behalf of the Senate, in popular concessions with

these inflamers; and hence the corrupt promises made to our Italian allies,

promises deceitfully made, or, by the interposition of some Tribune, defeated.

Neither during the war of Italy, nor during the civil war, was the making of

regulations discontinued; many and contradictory were even then made. At

last Sylla the Dictator, changing or abolishing the past, added many of his

own, and procured some respite in this matter, but not long; for presently

followed the turbulent pursuits and proposals of Lepidus, and soon after were

the Tribunes restored to their licentious authority of throwing the people into

combustions at pleasure. And now laws were not made for the public only,

but  for  particular  men  particular  laws;  and  corruption  abounding  in  the

Commonwealth, the Commonwealth abounded in laws.

 
Pompey  was,  now  in  his  third  Consulship,  chosen  to  correct  the  public

enormities;  and  his  remedies  proved  to  the  State  more  grievous  than  its

distempers. He made laws such as suited his ambition, and broke them when

they thwarted his will; and lost by arms the regulations which by arms he had

procured. Henceforward for twenty years discord raged, and there was neither

law nor settlement; the most wicked found impunity in the excess of their

wickedness; and many virtuous men, in their uprightness met destruction. At

length, Augustus Caesar in his sixth Consulship, then confirmed in power

without a rival, abolished the orders which during the Triumvirate he had

established, and gave us laws proper for peace and a single ruler. These laws

had  sanctions  severer  than  any  heretofore  known:  as  their  guardians,informers were appointed, who by the Law Papia Poppaea were encouraged

with rewards, to watch such as neglected the privileges annexed to marriage

and fatherhood, and consequently could claim no legacy or inheritance, the

same, as vacant, belonging to the Roman People, who were the public parent.

But these informers struck much deeper: by them the whole city, all Italy, and

the Roman citizens in every part of the Empire, were infested and persecuted:

numbers were stripped of their entire fortunes, and terror had seized all; when

Tiberius, for a check to this evil, chose twenty noblemen, five who were

formerly Consuls, five who were formerly Praetors, with ten other Senators,

to  review  that  law.  By  them  many  of  its  intricacies  were  explained,  its

strictness qualified; and hence some present alleviation was yielded.

 
Tiberius about this time, to the Senate recommended Nero, one of the sons of

Germanicus,  now  seventeen  years  of  age,  and  desired  "that  he  might  be

exempted from executing the office of the Vigintivirate, [Footnote: Officers

for distributing the public lands; for regulating the mint, the roads, and the

execution of criminals.] and have leave to sue for the Quaestorship five years

sooner than the laws directed." A piece of mockery, this request to all who

heard it: but, Tiberius pretended "that the same concessions had been decreed

to himself and his brother Drusus, at the request of Augustus." Nor do I

doubt, but there were then such who secretly ridiculed that sort of petitions

from Augustus: such policy was however natural to that Prince, while he was

but yet laying the foundations of the Imperial power, and while the Republic

and its late laws were still fresh in the minds of men: besides, the relation was

lighter between Augustus and his wife's sons, than between a grandfather and

his  grandsons.  To  the  grant  of  the  Quaestorship  was  added  a  seat  in  the

College of Pontiffs; and the first day he entered the Forum in his manly robe,

a donative of corn and money was distributed to the populace, who exulted to

behold a son of Germanicus now of age. Their joy was soon heightened by

his marriage with Julia, the daughter of Drusus. But as these transactions

were attended with public applauses; so the intended marriage of the daughter

of Sejanus with the son of Claudius was received with popular indignation.

By this alliance the nobility of the Claudian house seemed stained; and by it

Sejanus, already suspected of aspiring views, was lifted still higher.

 
At the end of this year died Lucius Volusius and Sallustius Crispus; great and

eminent men. The family of Volusius was ancient, but, in the exercise of

public  offices,  rose  never  higher  than  the  Praetorship;  it  was  he,  whohonoured  it  with  the  Consulship:  he  was  likewise  created  Censor  for

modelling  the  classes  of  the  equestrian  order;  and  first  accumulated  the

wealth which gave that family such immense grandeur. Crispus was born of

an  equestrian  house,  great  nephew  by  a  sister  to  Caius  Sallustius,  the

renowned Roman historian, and by him adopted: the way to the great offices

was open to him; but, in imitation of Maecenas, he lived without the dignity

of  Senator,  yet  outwent  in  power  many  who  were  distinguished  with

Consulships and triumphs: his manner of living, his dress and daintiness were

different  from  the  ways  of  antiquity;  and,  in  expense  and  affluence,  he

bordered rather upon luxury. He possessed however a vigour of spirit equal to

great affairs, and exerted the greater promptness for that he hid it in a show of

indolence and sloth: he was therefore, in the time of Maecenas, the next in

favour, afterwards chief confidant in all the secret counsels of Augustus and

Tiberius,  and  privy  and  consenting  to  the  order  for  slaying  Agrippa

Posthumus. In his old age he preserved with the Prince rather the outside than

the vitals of authority: the same had happened to Maecenas. It is the fate of

power, which is rarely perpetual; perhaps from satiety on both sides, when

Princes have no more to grant, and Ministers no more to crave.

 
Next followed the Consulship of Tiberius and Drusus; to Tiberius the fourth,

to Drusus the second: a Consulship remarkable, for that in it the father and

son were colleagues. There was indeed the same fellowship between Tiberius

and Germanicus, two years before; but besides the distastes of jealousy in the

uncle,  the  ties  of  blood  were  not  so  near.  In  the  beginning  of  the  year,

Tiberius,  on  pretence  of  his  health,  retired  to  Campania;  either  already

meditating  a  long  and  perpetual  retirement;  or  to  leave  to  Drusus,  in  his

father's absence, the honour of executing the Consulship alone: and there

happened  a  thing  which,  small  in  itself,  yet  as  it  produced  mighty

contestation, furnished the young Consul with matter of popular affection.

Domitius  Corbulo,  formerly  Praetor,  complained  to  the  Senate  of  Lucius

Sylla, a noble youth, "that in the show of gladiators, Sylla would not yield

him place." Age, domestic custom, and the ancient men were for Corbulo: on

the other side, Mamercus Scaurus, Lucius Arruntius, and others laboured for

their kinsman Sylla: warm speeches were made, and the examples of our

ancestors were urged, "who by severe decrees had censured and restrained

the irreverence of the youth." Drusus interposed with arguments proper for

calming animosities, and Corbulo had satisfaction made him by Scaurus, whowas to Sylla both father-in-law and uncle, and the most copious orator of that

age. The same Corbulo, exclaiming against "the condition of most of the

roads through Italy, that through the fraud of the undertakers and negligence

of the overseers, they were broken and unpassable;" undertook of his own

accord the cure of that abuse; an undertaking which he executed not so much

to the advantage of the public as to the ruin of many private men in their

fortunes  and  reputation,  by  his  violent  mulcts  and  unjust  judgments  and

forfeitures.

 
Upon this occasion Caecina Severus proposed, "that no magistrate should go

into any province accompanied by his wife." He introduced this motion with

a long preface, "that he lived with his own in perfect concord, by her he had

six  children;  and  what  he  offered  to  the  public  he  had  practised  himself,

having during forty years' service left her still behind him, confined to Italy.

It  was  not  indeed,  without  cause,  established  of  old,  that  women  should

neither be carried by their husbands into confederate nations nor foreign. A

train of women introduced luxury in peace, by their fears retarded war, and

made a Roman army resemble, in their march, a mixed host of barbarians.

The  sex  was  not  tender  only  and  unfit  for  travel,  but,  if  suffered,  cruel,

aspiring, and greedy of authority: they even marched amongst the soldiers,

and  were  obeyed  by  the  officers.  A  woman  had  lately  presided  at  the

exercises  of  the  troops,  and  at  the  decursions  of  the  legions.  The  Senate

themselves might remember, that as often as any of the magistrates were

charged with plundering the provinces, their wives were always engaged in

the guilt. To the ladies, the most profligate in the province applied; by them

all affairs were undertaken, by them transacted: at home two distinct courts

were kept, and abroad the wife had her distinct train and attendance. The

ladies,  too,  issued  distinct  orders,  but  more  imperious  and  better  obeyed.

Such feminine excesses were formerly restrained by the Oppian, and other

laws; but now these restraints were violated, women ruled all things, their

families, the Forum, and even the armies."

 
This speech was heard by few with approbation, and many proclaimed their

dissent;  "for,  that  neither  was  that  the  point  in  debate,  nor  was  Caecina

considerable  enough  to  censure  so  weighty  an  affair."  He  was  presently

answered by Valerius Messalinus, who was the son of Messala, and inherited

a sparkling of his father's eloquence: "that many rigorous institutions of the

ancients were softened and changed for the better: for, neither was Romenow, as of old, beset with wars, nor Italy with hostile provinces; and a few

concessions were made to the conveniences of women, who were so far from

burdening  the  provinces,  that  to  their  own  husbands  there  they  were  no

burden.  As  to  honours,  attendance  and  expense,  they  enjoyed  them  in

common  with  their  husbands,  who  could  receive  no  embarrassment  from

their company in time of peace. To war indeed we must go equipped and

unencumbered; but after the fatigues of war, what was more allowable than

the consolations of a wife? But it seemed the wives of some magistrates had

given a loose to ambition and avarice. And were the magistrates themselves

free  from  these  excesses?  were  not  most  of  them  governed  by  many

exorbitant appetites? did we therefore send none into the provinces? It was

added, that the husbands were corrupted by their corrupt wives: and were

therefore  all  single  men  uncorrupt?  The  Oppian  Laws  were  once  thought

necessary, because the exigencies of the State required their severity: they

were afterwards relaxed and mollified, because that too was expedient for the

State. In vain we covered our own sloth with borrowed names: if the wife

broke bounds, the husband ought to bear the blame. It was moreover unjustly

judged, for the weak and uxorious spirit of one or a few, to bereave all others

of the fellowship of their wives, the natural partners of their prosperity and

distress. Besides, the sex, weak by nature, would be left defenceless, exposed

to the luxurious bent of their native passions, and a prey to the allurements of

adulterers: scarce under the eye and restraint of the husband was the marriage

bed preserved inviolate: what must be the consequence, when by an absence

of many years, the ties of marriage would be forgot, forgot as it were in a

divorce? It became them, therefore, so to cure the evils abroad as not to forget

the enormities at Rome." To this Drusus added somewhat concerning his own

wedlock. "Princes," he said, "were frequently obliged to visit the remote parts

of the Empire: how often did the deified Augustus travel to the East, how

often to the West, still accompanied with Livia? He himself too had taken a

progress  to  Illyricum,  and,  if  it  were  expedient,  was  ready  to  visit  other

nations; but not always with an easy spirit, if he were to be torn from his dear

wife, her by whom he had so many children." Thus was Caecina's motion

eluded.

 
When the Senate met next, they had a letter from Tiberius. In it he affected to

chide the fathers, "that upon him they cast all public cares;" and named them

M. Lepidus and Junius Blesus, to choose either for Proconsul of Africa. Theywere then both heard as to this nomination: Lepidus excused himself with

earnestness; he pleaded "his bodily frailty, the tender age of his children, and

a daughter fit for marriage." There was another reason too, of which he said

nothing;  but  it  was  easily  understood:  Blesus  was  uncle  to  Sejanus,  and

therefore had the prevailing interest. Blesus too made a show of refusing, but

not with the like positiveness, and was heard with partiality by the flatterers

of power.

 
The same year the cities of Gaul, stimulated by their excessive debts, began a

rebellion.  The  most  vehement  incendiaries  were  Julius  Florus  and  Julius

Sacrovir; the first amongst those of Treves, the second amongst the Aeduans.

They were both distinguished by their nobility, and by the good services of

their ancestors, who thence had acquired of old the right of Roman citizens; a

privilege rare in those days, and then only the prize of virtue. When by secret

meetings, they had gained those who were most prompt to rebel; with such as

were desperate through indigence, or, from guilt of past crimes, forced to

commit more; they agreed that Florus should begin the insurrection in Belgia;

Sacrovir amongst the neighbouring Gauls. In order to this, they had many

consultations and cabals, where they uttered seditious harangues; they urged

"their tribute without end, their devouring usury, the pride and cruelty of their

Governors: that they had now a glorious opportunity to recover their liberty;

for that since the report of the murder of Germanicus, discord had seized the

Roman soldiery: they need only consider their own strength and numbers;

while  Italy  was  poor  and  exhausted;  the  Roman  populace  weak  and

unwarlike, the Roman armies destitute of all vigour but that derived from

foreigners."

 
Scarce one city remained untainted with the seeds of this rebellion; but it first

broke at Angiers and Tours. The former were reduced by Acilius Aviola, a

legate, with the assistance of a cohort drawn from the garrison at Lyons.

Those  of  Tours  were  suppressed  by  the  same  Aviola,  assisted  with  a

detachment sent from the legions, by Visellius Varro, lieutenant- governor of

lower Germany. Some of the chiefs of the Gauls had likewise joined him

with succours, the better to disguise their defection, and to push it with more

effect hereafter. Even Sacrovir was beheld engaged in fight for the Romans,

with his head bare, a demonstration, he pretended, of his bravery; but the

prisoners  averred,  that  "he  did  it  to  be  known  to  his  countrymen,  and  to

escape their darts." 
An  account  of  all  this  was  laid  before  Tiberius,  who  slighted  it,  and  by

hesitation fostered the war. Florus the while pushed his designs, and tried to

debauch a regiment of horse, levied at Treves, and kept under our pay and

discipline: he would have engaged them to begin the war, by putting to the

sword the Roman merchants; and some few were corrupted, but the body

remained in their allegiance. A rabble however, of his own followers and

desperate debtors, took arms and were making to the forest of Arden, when

the  legions  sent  from  both  armies  by  Visellius  and  Caius  Silius,  through

different routes to intercept them, marred their march: and Julius Indus, one

of the same country with Florus, at enmity with him, and therefore more

eager to engage him, was despatched forward with a chosen band, and broke

the ill-appointed multitude. Florus by lurking from place to place, frustrated

the search of the conquerors: but at last, when he saw all the passes beset

with soldiers, he fell by his own hands. This was the issue of the insurrection

at Treves.

 
Amongst the Aeduans the revolt was stronger, as much stronger as the state

was more opulent; and the forces to suppress it were to be brought from afar.

Augustodunum, [Footnote: Autun.] the capital of the nation, was seized by

Sacrovir, and in it all the noble youth of Gaul, who were there instructed in

the liberal arts. By securing these pledges he aimed to bind in his interest

their parents and relations; and at the same time distributed to the young men

the arms, which he had caused to be secretly made. He had forty thousand

men, the fifth part armed like our legions, the rest with poles, hangers, and

other weapons used by hunters. To the number were added such of the slaves

as had been appointed to be gladiators; these were covered, after the fashion

of the country, with a continued armour of iron; and styled Crupellarii; a sort

of militia unwieldy at exercising their own weapons, and impenetrable by

those  of  others.  These  forces  were  still  increased  by  volunteers  from  the

neighbouring cities, where, though the public body did not hitherto avow the

revolt, yet the zeal of particulars was manifest: they had likewise leisure to

increase from the contention of the two Roman generals; a contention for

some time undecided, while each demanded the command in that war. At

length Varro, old and infirm, yielded to the superior vigour of Silius.

 
Now at Rome, "not only the insurrection of Treves and of the Aeduans, but

likewise,  that  threescore  and  four  cities  of  Gaul  had  revolted;  that  theGermans had joined in the revolt, and that Spain fluctuated;" were reports all

believed  with  the  usual  aggravations  of  fame.  The  best  men  grieved  in

sympathy for their country: many from hatred of the present government and

thirst of change, rejoiced in their own perils: they inveighed against Tiberius,

"that in such a mighty uproar of rebellion, he was only employed in perusing

the  informations  of  the  State  accusers."  They  asked,  "did  he  mean  to

surrender Julius Sacrovir to the Senate, to try him for treason?" They exulted,

"that there were at last found men, who would with arms restrain his bloody

orders for private murders." And declared "that even war was a happy change

for a most wretched peace." So much the more for this, Tiberius affected to

appear wrapped up in security and unconcern; he neither changed place nor

countenance, but behaved himself at that time as at other times; whether from

elevation of mind, or whether he had learned that the state of things was not

alarming, and only heightened by vulgar representation.

 
Silius the while sending forward a band of auxiliaries, marched with two

legions,  and  in  his  march  ravaged  the  villages  of  the  Sequanians,  next

neighbours to the Aeduans, and their associates in arms. He then advanced

towards Augustodunum; a hasty march, the standard-bearers mutually vying

in expedition, and the common men breathing ardour and eagerness: they

desired, "that no time might be wasted in the usual refreshments, none of

their nights in sleep; let them only see and confront the foe: they wanted no

more,  to  be  victorious."  Twelve  miles  from  Augustodunum,  Sacrovir

appeared with his forces upon the plains: in the front he had placed the iron

troop; his cohorts in the wings; the half-armed in the rear: he himself, upon a

fine horse, attended by the other chiefs, addressed himself to them from rank

to  rank;  he  reminded  them  "of  the  glorious  achievements  of  the  ancient

Gauls; of the victorious mischiefs they had brought upon the Romans; of the

liberty  and  renown  attending  victory;  of  their  redoubled  and  intolerable

servitude, if once more vanquished."

 
A  short  speech;  and  an  unattentive,  and  disheartened  audience!  For,  the

embattled legions approached; and the crowd of townsmen, ill appointed and

novices  in  war,  stood  astonished,  bereft  of  the  present  use  of  eyes  and

hearing. On the other side, Silius, though he presumed the victory, and thence

might have spared exhortations, yet called to his men, "that they might be

with reason ashamed that they, the conquerors of Germany, should be thus

led against a rabble of Gauls as against an equal enemy: one cohort hadnewly defeated the rebels of Tours; one regiment of horse, those of Treves; a

handful of this very army had routed the Sequanians: the present Aeduans, as

they are more abounding in wealth, as they wallow more in voluptuousness,

are by so much more soft and unwarlike: this is what you are now to prove,

and  your  task  to  prevent  their  escape."  His  words  were  returned  with  a

mighty cry. Instantly the horse surrounded the foe; the foot attacked their

front, and the wings were presently routed: the iron band gave some short

obstruction, as the bars of their coats withstood the strokes of sword and pike:

but the soldiers had recourse to their hatchets and pick-axes; and, as if they

had battered a wall, hewed their bodies and armour: others with clubs, and

some with forks, beat down the helpless lumps, who as they lay stretched

along, without one struggle to rise, were left for dead. Sacrovir fled first to

Augustodunum; and thence, fearful of being surrendered, to a neighbouring

town, accompanied by his most faithful adherents. There he slew himself;

and the rest, one another: having first set the town on fire, by which they

were all consumed.

 
Now  at  last  Tiberius  wrote  to  the  Senate  about  this  war,  and  at  once

acquainted them with its rise and conclusion, neither aggravating facts nor

lessening them; but added "that it was conducted by the fidelity and bravery

of his lieutenants, guided by his counsels." He likewise assigned the reasons

why  neither  he,  nor  Drusus,  went  to  that  war;  "that  the  Empire  was  an

immense body; and it became not the dignity of a Prince, upon the revolt of

one or two towns, to desert the capital, whence motion was derived to the

whole: but since the alarm was over, he would visit those nations and settle

them." The Senate decreed vows and supplications for his return, with other

customary  honours.  Only  Cornelius  Dolabella,  while  he  strove  to  outdo

others, fell into ridiculous sycophancy, and moved "that from Campania he

should enter Rome in the triumph of ovation." This occasioned a letter from

Tiberius: in it he declared, "he was not so destitute of glory, that after having

in his youth subdued the fiercest nations, and enjoyed or slighted so many

triumphs, he should now in his old age seek empty honours from a short

progress about the suburbs of Rome."

 
Caius Sulpitius and Decimus Haterius were the following Consuls. Their year

was exempt from disturbances abroad; but at home some severe blow was

apprehended against luxury, which prevailed monstrously in all things that

create a profusion of money. But as the more pernicious articles of expensewere covered by concealing their prices; therefore from the excesses of the

table,  which  were  become  the  common  subject  of  daily  animadversion,

apprehensions  were  raised  of  some  rigid  correction  from  a  Prince,  who

observed himself the ancient parsimony. For, Caius Bibulus having begun the

complaint, the other Aediles took it up, and argued "that the sumptuary laws

were despised; the pomp and expense of plate and entertainments, in spite of

restraints, increased daily, and by moderate penalties were not to be stopped."

This grievance thus represented to the Senate, was by them referred entire to

the Emperor. Tiberius having long weighed with himself whether such an

abandoned  propensity  to  prodigality  could  be  stemmed;  whether  the

stemming  it  would  not  bring  heavier  evils  upon  the  public;  how

dishonourable it would be to attempt what could not be effected, or at least

effected by the disgrace of the nobility, and by the subjecting illustrious men

to infamous punishments; wrote at last to the Senate in this manner:

 
"In other matters, Conscript Fathers, perhaps it might be more expedient for

you to consult me in the Senate; and for me to declare there, what I judge for

the public weal: but in the debate of this affair, it was best that my eyes were

withdrawn; lest, while you marked the countenances and terror of particulars

charged with scandalous luxury, I too should have observed them, and, as it

were, caught them in it. Had the vigilant Aediles first asked counsel of me, I

know not whether I should not have advised them rather to have passed by

potent  and  inveterate  corruptions,  than  only  make  it  manifest,  what

enormities are an overmatch for us: but they in truth have done their duty, as

I would have all other magistrates fulfil theirs. But for myself, it is neither

commendable to be silent; nor does it belong to my station to speak out; since

I neither bear the character of an Aedile, nor of a Praetor, nor of a Consul:

something still greater and higher is required of a Prince. Every one is ready

to assume to himself the credit of whatever is well done, while upon the

Prince alone are thrown the miscarriages of all. But what is it, that I am first

to prohibit, what excess retrench to the ancient standard? Am I to begin with

that of our country seats, spacious without bounds; and with the number of

domestics, a number distributed into nations in private families? or with the

quantity  of  plate,  silver,  and  gold?  or  with  the  pictures,  and  works,  and

statues  of  brass,  the  wonders  of  art?  or  with  the  gorgeous  vestments,

promiscuously worn by men and women? or with what is peculiar to the

women, those precious stones, for the purchase of which our corn is carriedinto foreign and hostile nations.

 
"I am not ignorant that at entertainments and in conversation, these excesses

are censured, and a regulation is required: and yet if an equal law were made,

if  equal  penalties  were  prescribed,  these  very  censurers  would  loudly

complain, that the State was utterly overturned, that snares and destruction

were prepared for every illustrious house, that no men could be guiltless, and

all  men  would  be  the  prey  of  informers.  And  yet  bodily  diseases  grown

inveterate and strengthened by time, cannot be checked but by medicines

rigid and violent: it is the same with the soul: the sick and raging soul, itself

corrupted and scattering its corruption, is not to be qualified but by remedies

equally  strong  with  its  own  flaming  lusts.  So  many  laws  made  by  our

ancestors, so many added by the deified Augustus; the former being lost in

oblivion,  and  (which  is  more  heinous)  the  latter  in  contempt,  have  only

served to render luxury more secure. When we covet a thing yet unforbid, we

are apt to fear that it may be forbid; but when once we can with impunity and

defiance overleap prohibited bounds, there remains afterwards nor fear nor

shame. How therefore did parsimony prevail of old? It was because, every

one was a law to himself; it was because we were then only masters of one

city: nor afterwards, while our dominion was confined only to Italy, had we

found  the  same  instigations  to  voluptuousness.  By  foreign  conquests,  we

learned to waste the property of others; and in the Civil Wars, to consume our

own. What a mighty matter is it that the Aediles remonstrate! how little to be

weighed in the balance with others? It is wonderful that nobody represents,

that Italy is in constant want of foreign supplies; that the lives of the Roman

People are daily at the mercy of uncertain seas and of tempests: were it not

for our supports from the provinces; supports, by which the masters, and their

slaves, and their estates, are maintained; would our own groves and villas

maintain us? This care therefore, Conscript Fathers, is the business of the

Prince; and by the neglect of this care, the foundations of the State would be

dissolved. The cure of other defects depends upon our own private spirits:

some of us, shame will reclaim; necessity will mend the poor; satiety the rich.

Or if any of the Magistrates, from a confidence of his own firmness and

perseverance, will undertake to stem the progress of so great an evil; he has

both my praises, and my acknowledgment, that he discharges me of part of

my fatigues: but if such will only impeach corruptions, and when they have

gained the glory, would leave upon me the indignation (indignation of theirown  raising);  believe  me,  Conscript  Fathers,  I  am  not  fond  of  bearing

resentments: I already suffer many for the Commonwealth; many that are

grievous and almost all unjust; and therefore with reason I intreat that I may

not be loaded with such as are wantonly and vainly raised, and promise no

advantage to you nor to me."

 
The Senate, upon reading the Emperor's letter, released the Aediles from this

pursuit: and the luxury of the table which, from the battle of Actium till the

revolution made by Galba, flowed, for the space of an hundred years, in all

profusion; at last gradually declined. The causes of this change are worth

knowing.  Formerly  the  great  families,  great  in  nobility  or  abounding  in

riches, were carried away with a passion for magnificence: for even then it

was allowed to court the good graces of the Roman People, with the favour of

kings, and confederate nations; and to be courted by them: so that each was

distinguished by the lustre of popularity and dependances, in proportion to

his affluence, the splendour of his house, and the figure he made. But after

Imperial  fury  had  long  raged  in  the  slaughter  of  the  Grandees,  and  the

greatness of reputation was become the sure mark of destruction; the rest

grew wiser: besides, new men frequently chosen Senators from the municipal

towns,  from  the  colonies,  and  even  from  the  provinces,  brought  into  the

Senate their own domestic parsimony; and though, by fortune or industry,

many of them grew wealthy as they grew old, yet their former frugal spirit

continued. But above all, Vespasian proved the promoter of thrifty living,

being himself the pattern of ancient economy in his person and table: hence

the  compliance  of  the  public  with  the  manners  of  the  Prince,  and  an

emulation to practise them; an incitement more prevalent than the terrors of

laws and all their penalties. Or perhaps all human things go a certain round;

and, as in the revolutions of time, there are also vicissitudes in manners: nor

indeed have our ancestors excelled us in all things; our own age has produced

many excellences worthy of praise and the imitation of posterity. Let us still

preserve this strife in virtue with our forefathers.

 
Tiberius having gained the fame of moderation; because, by rejecting the

project  for  reforming  luxury,  he  had  disarmed  the  growing  hopes  of  the

accusers; wrote to the Senate, to desire the Tribunitial Power for Drusus.

Augustus had devised this title, as best suiting the unbounded height of his

views;  while  avoiding  the  odious  name  of  King  or  Dictator,  he  was  yet

obliged to use some particular appellation, under it to control all other powersin the State. He afterwards assumed Marcus Agrippa into a fellowship in it;

and, upon his death, Tiberius; that none might doubt, who was to be his

successor. By this means, he conceived, he should defeat the aspiring views

of  others:  besides,  he  confided  in  the  moderation  of  Tiberius,  and  in  the

mightiness of his own authority. By his example, Tiberius now advanced

Drusus to the supreme Magistracy; whereas, while Germanicus yet lived, he

acted  without  distinction  towards  both.  In  the  beginning  of  his  letter  he

besought the Gods "that by his counsels the Republic might prosper," and

then added a modest testimony concerning the qualities and behaviour of the

young Prince, without aggravation or false embellishments; "that he had a

wife and three children, and was of the same age with himself, when called

by  the  deified  Augustus  to  that  office:  that  Drusus  was  not  now  by  him

adopted a partner in the toils of government, precipitately; but after eight

years' experience made of his qualifications; after seditions suppressed, wars

concluded, the honour of triumph, and two Consulships."

 
The Senators had foreseen this address; hence they received it with the more

elaborate  adulation.  However,  they  could  devise  nothing  to  decree,  but

"statues  to  the  two  Princes,  altars  to  the  Gods,  arches,"  and  other  usual

honours:  only  that  Marcus  Silanus  strove  to  honour  the  Princes  by  the

disgrace of the Consulship: he proposed "that all records public and private

should, for their date, be inscribed no more with the names of the Consuls,

but of those who exercised the Tribunitial power." But Haterius Agrippa, by

moving to have "the decrees of that day engraved in letters of gold, and hung

up in the Senate," became an object of derision; for that, as he was an ancient

man, he could reap from his most abominable flattery no other fruit but that

of infamy.

 
Tiberius, while he fortified the vitals of his own domination, afforded the

Senate  a  shadow  of  their  ancient  jurisdiction;  by  referring  to  their

examination  petitions  and  claims  from  the  provinces.  For  there  had  now

prevailed  amongst  the  Greek  cities  a  latitude  of  instituting  sanctuaries  at

pleasure.  Hence  the  temples  were  filled  with  the  most  profligate  fugitive

slaves: here debtors found protection against their creditors; and hither were

admitted  such  as  were  pursued  for  capital  crimes.  Nor  was  any  force  of

Magistracy  or  laws  sufficient  to  bridle  the  mad  zeal  of  the  people,  who

confounding the sacred villainies of men with the worship peculiar to the

Gods,  seditiously  defended  these  profane  sanctuaries.  It  was  thereforeordered that these cities should send deputies to represent their claims. Some

of the cities voluntarily relinquished the nominal privileges, which they had

arbitrarily assumed: many confided in their rights; a confidence grounded on

the antiquity of their superstitions, or on the merits of their kind offices to the

Roman People. Glorious to the Senate was the appearance of that day, when

the  grants  from  our  ancestors,  the  engagements  of  our  confederates,  the

ordinances of kings, such kings who had reigned as yet independent of the

Roman power; and when even the sacred worship of the Gods were now all

subjected to their inspection, and their judgment free, as of old, to ratify or

abolish with absolute power.

 
First of all the Ephesians applied. They alleged, that "Diana and Apollo were

not, according to the credulity of the vulgar, born at Delos: in their territory

flowed the river Cenchris; where also stood the Ortygian Grove: there the

big-bellied Latona, leaning upon an olive tree, which even then remained,

was delivered of these deities; and thence by their appointment the Grove

became sacred. Thither Apollo himself, after his slaughter of the Cyclops,

retired for a sanctuary from the wrath of Jupiter: soon after, the victorious

Bacchus pardoned the suppliant Amazons, who sought refuge at the altar of

Diana: by the concession of Hercules, when he reigned in Lydia, her temple

was dignified with an augmentation of immunities; nor during the Persian

monarchy  were  they  abridged:  they  were  next  maintained  by  the

Macedonians, and then by us."

 
The Magnesians next asserted their claim, founded on an establishment of

Lucius Scipio, confirmed by another of Sylla: the former after the defeat of

Antiochus; the latter after that of Mithridates, having, as a testimony of the

faith  and  bravery  of  the  Magnesians,  dignified  their  temple  of  the

Leucophrynaean Diana with the privileges of an inviolable sanctuary. After

them, the Aphrodisians and Stratoniceans produced a grant from Caesar the

Dictator,  for  their  early  services  to  his  party;  and  another  lately  from

Augustus, with a commendation inserted, "that with zeal unshaken towards

the Roman People, they had borne the irruption of the Parthians." But these

two  people  adored  different  deities:  Aphrodisium  was  a  city  devoted  to

Venus; that of Stratonicea maintained the worship of Jupiter and of Diana

Trivia.  Those  of  Hierocaesarea  exhibited  claims  of  higher  antiquity,  "that

they  possessed  the  Persian  Diana,  and  her  temple  consecrated  by  King

Cyrus." They likewise pleaded the authorities of Perpenna, Isauricus, and ofmany more Roman captains, who had allowed the same sacred immunity not

to the temple only, but to a precinct two miles round it. Those of Cyprus

pleaded right of sanctuary to three of their temples: the most ancient founded

by  Aerias  to  the  Paphian  Venus;  another  by  his  son  Amathus  to  the

Amathusian Venus; the third to the Salaminian Jupiter by Teucer, the son of

Telamon, when he fled from the fury of his father.

 
The deputies too of other cities were heard. But the Senate tired with so

many, and because there was a contention begun amongst particular parties

for particular cities; gave power to the Consuls "to search into the validity of

their several pretensions, and whether in them no fraud was interwoven;"

with  orders  "to  lay  the  whole  matter  once  more  before  the  Senate."  The

Consuls reported that, besides the cities already mentioned, "they had found

the temple of AEsculapius at Pergamus to be a genuine sanctuary: the rest

claimed upon originals, from the darkness of antiquity, altogether obscure.

Smyrna particularly pleaded an oracle of Apollo, in obedience to which they

had dedicated a temple to Venus Stratonices; as did the Isle of Tenos an

oracular order from the same God, to erect to Neptune a statue and temple.

Sardis urged a later authority, namely, a grant from the Great Alexander; and

Miletus insisted on one from King Darius: as to the deities of these two cities;

one  worshipped  Diana;  the  other,  Apollo.  And  Crete  too  demanded  the

privilege of sanctuary, to a statue of the deified Augustus." Hence diverse

orders of Senate were made, by which, though great reverence was expressed

towards the deities, yet the extent of the sanctuaries was limited; and the

several people were enjoined "to hang up in each temple the present decree

engraven in brass, as a sacred memorial, and a restraint against their lapsing,

under the colour of religion, into the abuses and claims of superstition."

 
At the same time, a vehement distemper having seized Livia, obliged the

Emperor to hasten his return to Rome; seeing hitherto the mother and son

lived in apparent unanimity; or perhaps mutually disguised their hate: for, not

long before, Livia, having dedicated a statue to the deified Augustus, near the

theatre of Marcellus, had the name of Tiberius inscribed after her own. This

he was believed to have resented heinously, as a degrading the dignity of the

Prince; but to have buried his resentment under dark dissimulation. Upon this

occasion, therefore, the Senate decreed "supplications to the Gods; with the

celebration of the greater Roman games, under the direction of the Pontifs,

the Augurs, the College of Fifteen, assisted by the College of Seven, and theFraternity of Augustal Priests." Lucius Apronius had moved, that "with the

rest  might  preside  the  company  of  heralds."  Tiberius  opposed  it;  he

distinguished between the jurisdiction of the priests and theirs; "for that at no

time had the heralds arrived to so much pre-eminence: but for the Augustal

Fraternity, they were therefore added, because they exercised a priesthood

peculiar  to  that  family  for  which  the  present  vows  and  solemnities  were

made," It is no part of my purpose to trace all the votes of particular men,

unless  they  are  memorable  for  integrity,  or  for  notorious  infamy:  this  I

conceive to be the principal duty of an historian, that he suppress no instance

of virtue; and that by the dread of future infamy and the censures of posterity,

men  may  be  deterred  from  detestable  actions  and  prostitute  speeches.  In

short, such was the abomination of those times, so prevailing the contagion of

flattery,  that  not  only  the  first  nobles,  whose  obnoxious  splendour  found

protection only in obsequiousness; but all who had been Consuls, a great part

of such as had been Praetors, and even many of the unregistered Senators,

strove  for  priority  in  the  vileness  and  excess  of  their  votes.  There  is  a

tradition, that Tiberius, as often as he went out of the Senate, was wont to cry

out in Greek, Oh men prepared for bondage! Yes, even Tiberius, he who

could not bear public liberty, nauseated this prostitute tameness of slaves.

 THE ANNALS:
BOOK IV

 
                                      BOOK IV 
                                      A.D. 23-28.

 
When Caius Asinius and Caius Antistius were Consuls, Tiberius was in his

ninth year; the State composed, and his family flourishing (for the death of

Germanicus  he  reckoned  amongst  the  incidents  of  his  prosperity)  when

suddenly fortune began to grow boisterous, and he himself to tyrannise, or to

furnish others with the weapons of tyranny. The beginning and cause of this

turn  arose  from  Aelius  Sejanus,  captain  of  the  Praetorian  cohorts.  Of  his

power  I  have  above  made  mention;  I  shall  now  explain  his  original,  his

manners, and by what black deeds he strove to snatch the sovereignty. He

was born at Vulsinii, son to Sejus Strabo, a Roman knight; in his early youth,

he was a follower of Caius Caesar (grandson of Augustus) and lay then under

the contumely of having for hire exposed himself to the constupration of

Apicius; a debauchee wealthy and profuse: next by various artifices he so

enchanted Tiberius, that he who to all others was dark and unsearchable,

became to Sejanus alone destitute of all restraint and caution: nor did he so

much  accomplish  this  by  any  superior  efforts  of  policy  (for  at  his  own

stratagems he was vanquished by others) as by the rage of the Gods against

the Roman State, to which he proved alike destructive when he flourished

and when he fell. His person was hardy and equal to fatigues; his spirit daring

but  covered;  sedulous  to  disguise  his  own  counsels,  dexterous  to  blacken

others; alike fawning and imperious; to appearance exactly modest; but in his

heart fostering the lust of domination; and, with this view, engaged at one

time  in  profusion,  largesses,  and  luxury;  and  again,  often  laid  out  in

application and vigilance; qualities no less pernicious, when personated by

ambition for the acquiring of Empire.

 
The  authority  of  his  command  over  the  guards,  which  was  but  moderate

before his time, he extended, by gathering into one camp all the Praetorian

cohorts then dispersed over the city; that thus united, they might all at once

receive  his  orders,  and  by  continually  beholding  their  own  numbers  and

strength, conceive confidence in themselves and prove a terror to all other

men. He pretended, "that the soldiers, while they lived scattered, lived loose

and debauched; that when gathered into a body, there could, in any hasty

emergency, be more reliance upon their succour; and that when encamped,

remote from the allurements of the town, they would in their discipline be

more  exact  and  severe."  When  the  encampment  was  finished,  he  begangradually to allure the affections of the soldiers, by all the ways of affability,

court, and familiarity: it was he too who chose the Centurions, he who chose

the Tribunes. Neither in his pursuits of ambition did the Senate escape him;

but  by  distinguishing  his  followers  in  it  with  offices  and  provinces,  he

cultivated  power  and  a  party  there:  for,  to  all  this  Tiberius  was  entirely

resigned; and even so passionate for him, that not in conversation only, but in

public, in his speeches to the Senate and people, he treated and extolled him,

as the sharer of his burdens; nay, allowed his effigies to be publicly adored,

in the several theatres, in all places of popular convention, and even amongst

the Eagles of the legions.

 
But to his designs were many retardments: the Imperial house was full of

Caesars;  the  Emperor's  son  a  grown  man,  and  his  grandsons  of  age:  and

because  the  cutting  them  off  all  at  once,  was  dangerous;  the  treason  he

meditated, required a gradation of murders. He however chose the darkest

method, and to begin with Drusus; against whom he was transported with a

fresh motive of rage. For, Drusus impatient of a rival, and in his temper

inflammable, had upon some occasional contest, shaken his fist at Sejanus,

and, as he prepared to resist, given him a blow on the face. As he therefore

cast about for every expedient of revenge, the readiest seemed to apply to

Livia  his  wife:  she  was  the  sister  of  Germanicus,  and  from  an  uncomely

person  in  her  childhood,  grew  afterwards  to  excel  in  loveliness.  As  his

passion for this lady was vehement, he tempted her to adultery, and having

fulfilled the first iniquity (nor will a woman, who has sacrificed her chastity,

stick at any other) he carried her greater lengths, to the views of marriage, a

partnership in the Empire, and even the murder of her husband. Thus she, the

niece of Augustus, the daughter-in-law of Tiberius, the mother of children by

Drusus, defiled herself, her ancestors, and her posterity, with a municipal

adulterer; and all to exchange an honourable condition possessed, for pursuits

flagitious and uncertain. Into a fellowship in the guilt was assumed Eudemus,

physician to Livia; and, under colour of his profession, frequently with her in

private. Sejanus too, to avoid the jealousy of the adulteress, discharged from

his bed Apicata his wife, her by whom he had three children. But still the

mightiness of the iniquity terrified them, and thence created caution, delays,

and frequently opposite counsels.

 
During  this,  in  the  beginning  of  the  year,  Drusus  one  of  the  sons  of

Germanicus, put on the manly robe; and upon him the Senate conferred thesame honours decreed before to his brother Nero. A speech was added by

Tiberius with a large encomium upon his son, "that with the tenderness of a

father he used the children of his brother." For, Drusus, however rare it be for

power and unanimity to subsist together, was esteemed benevolent, certainly

not ill-disposed, towards these youths. Now again was revived by Tiberius

the proposal of a progress into the Provinces; a stale proposal, always hollow,

but often feigned. He pretended "the multitude of veterans discharged, and

thence the necessity of recruiting the armies; that volunteers were wanting, or

if already such there were, they were chiefly the necessitous and vagabonds,

and  destitute  of  the  like  modesty  and  courage."  He  likewise  cursorily

recounted the number of the legions, and what countries they defended: a

detail which I think it behoves me also to repeat; that thence may appear what

was then the complement of the Roman forces, what kings their confederates,

and how much more narrow the limits of the Empire.

 
Italy  was  on  each  side  guarded  by  two  fleets;  one  at  Misenum,  one  at

Ravenna; and the coast joining to Gaul, by the galleys taken by Augustus at

the battle of Actium, and sent powerfully manned to Forojulium. [Footnote:

Fréjus.] But the chief strength lay upon the Rhine; they were eight legions, a

common guard upon the Germans and the Gauls. The reduction of Spain,

lately  completed,  was  maintained  by  three.  Mauritania  was  possessed  by

King Juba; a realm which he held as a gift from the Roman People: the rest of

Africa by two legions; and Egypt by the like number. Four legions kept in

subjection all the mighty range of country, extending from the next limits of

Syria, as far as the Euphrates, and bordering upon the Iberians, Albanians,

and  other  Principalities,  who  by  our  might  are  protected  against  Foreign

Powers. Thrace was held by Rhoemetalces, and the sons of Cotys; and both

banks of the Danube by four legions; two in Pannonia, two in Moesia. In

Dalmatia likewise were placed two; who, by the situation of the country,

were at hand to support the former, and had not far to march into Italy, were

any  sudden  succours  required  there:  though  Rome  too  had  her  peculiar

soldiery;  three  city  cohorts,  and  nine  Praetorian,  enlisted  chiefly  out  of

Etruria and Umbria, or from the ancient Latium and the old Roman colonies.

In the several Provinces, besides, were disposed, according to their situation

and necessity, the fleets of the several confederates, with their squadrons and

battalions; a number of forces not much different from all the rest: but the

particular  detail  would  be  uncertain;  since,  according  to  the  exigency  oftimes,  they  often  shifted  stations,  with  numbers  sometimes  enlarged,

sometimes reduced.

 
It will, I believe, fall in properly here to review also the other parts of the

Administration, and by what measures it was hitherto conducted, till with the

beginning of this year the Government of Tiberius began to wax worse. First

then, all public, and every private business of moment, was determined by the

Senate: to the great men he allowed liberty of debate: those who in their

debates lapsed into flattery, he checked: in conferring preferments, he was

guided  by  merit,  by  ancient  nobility,  renown  in  war  abroad,  by  civil

accomplishments at home; insomuch that it was manifest, his choice could

not have been better. There remained to the Consuls, there remained to the

Praetors  the  useful  marks  of  their  dignities;  to  inferior  magistrates  the

independent exercise of their charges; and the laws, where the power of the

Prince was not concerned, were in proper force. The tributes, duties, and all

public  receipts,  were  directed  by  companies  of  Roman  knights:  the

management of his own revenue he committed only to those of the most

noted  qualifications;  mostly  known  by  himself,  and  to  some  known  by

reputation  alone:  and  when  once  taken,  they  were  continued,  without  all

restriction  of  term;  since  most  grew  old  in  the  same  employments.  The

populace were indeed aggrieved by the dearth of provisions; but without any

fault of the Prince: nay, he spared no possible expense nor pains to remedy

the effects of barrenness in the earth, and of wrecks at sea. He provided that

the Provinces should not be oppressed with new impositions; and that no

extortion, or violence should be committed by the magistrates in raising the

old: there were no infamous corporal punishments, no confiscations of goods.

 
The  Emperor's  possessions  through  Italy,  were  thin;  the  behaviour  of  his

slaves modest; the freedmen who managed his house, few; and in his disputes

with particulars, the courts were open and the law equal. All which restraints

he observed, not, in truth, in the ways of complaisance and popularity; but

always stern, and for the most part terrible; yet still he retained them, till by

the death of Drusus they were abandoned: for, while he lived they continued;

because  Sejanus,  while  he  was  but  laying  the  foundations  of  his  power,

studied to recommend himself by good counsels. He then had besides, an

avenger to dread, one who disguised not his enmity, but was frequent in his

complaints;  "that  when  the  son  was  in  his  prime,  another  was  called,  as

coadjutor,  to  the  Government;  nay,  how  little  was  wanting  to  his  beingdeclared colleague in the Empire? That the first advances to sovereignty are

steep and perilous; but, once you are entered, parties and instruments are

ready to espouse you. Already a camp for the guards was formed, by the

pleasure and authority of the captain: into whose hands the soldiers were

delivered:  in  the  theatre  of  Pompey  his  statue  was  beheld:  in  his

grandchildren would be mixed the blood of the Drusi with that of Sejanus.

After all this what remained but to supplicate his modesty to rest contented."

Nor was it rarely that he uttered these disgusts, nor to a few; besides, his wife

being debauched, all his secrets were betrayed.

 
Sejanus  therefore  judging  it  time  to  despatch,  chose  such  a  poison  as  by

operating gradually, might preserve the appearances of a casual disease. This

was administered to Drusus by Lygdus the eunuch, as, eight years after, was

learnt. Now during all the days of his illness, Tiberius disclosed no symptoms

of anguish (perhaps from ostentation of a firmness of spirit) nay, when he had

expired, and while he was yet unburied, he entered the Senate; and finding

the Consuls placed upon a common seat, as a testimony of their grief; he

admonished them of their dignity and station: and as the Senators burst into

tears,  he  smothered  his  rising  sighs,  and,  by  a  speech  uttered  without

hesitation, animated them. "He, in truth, was not ignorant," he said, "that he

might be censured, for having thus in the first throbs of sorrow, beheld the

face of the Senate; when most of those who feel the fresh pangs of mourning,

can  scarce  endure  the  soothings  of  their  kindred,  scarce  behold  the  day:

neither were such to be condemned of weakness: but for himself, he had

more  powerful  consolations;  such  as  arose  from  embracing  the

Commonwealth, and pursuing her welfare." He then lamented "the extreme

age  of  his  mother,  the  tender  years  of  his  grandsons,  his  own  days  in

declension;" and desired that, "as the only alleviation of the present evils, the

children of Germanicus might be introduced." The Consuls therefore went for

them,  and  having  with  kind  words  fortified  their  young  minds,  presented

them to the Emperor. He took them by the hand and said, "Conscript Fathers,

these infants, bereft of their father, I committed to their uncle; and besought

him that, though he had issue of his own, he would rear and nourish them no

otherwise  than  as  the  immediate  offspring  of  his  blood;  that  he  would

appropriate them as stays to himself and posterity. Drusus being snatched

from us, to you I address the same prayers; and in the presence of the Gods,

in the face of your country, I adjure you, receive into your protection, takeunder your tuition the great-grandchildren of Augustus; children, descended

from ancestors the most glorious in the State: towards them fulfil your own,

fulfil my duty. To you, Nero; to you, Drusus, these Senators are in the stead

of a father; and such is the situation of your birth, that on the Commonwealth

must light all the good and evil which befalls you."

 
All this was heard with much weeping, and followed with propitious prayers

and  vows:  and  had  he  only  gone  thus  far,  and  in  his  speech  observed  a

medium, he had left the souls of his hearers full of sympathy and applause.

But, by renewing an old project, always chimerical and so often ridiculed,

about "restoring the Republic, reinstating it again in the Consuls, or whoever

else  would  undertake  the  administration;"  he  forfeited  his  faith  even  in

assertions which were commendable and sincere. To the memory of Drusus

were  decreed  the  same  solemnities  as  to  that  of  Germanicus;  with  many

super-added; agreeably to the genius of flattery, which delights in variety and

improvements. Most signal was the lustre of the funeral in a conspicuous

procession of images; when at it appeared in a pompous train, Aeneas, father

of the Julian race; all the kings of Alba, and Romulus founder of Rome; next

the  Sabine  nobility,  Attus  Clausus,  and  his  descendants  of  the  Claudian

family.

 
In  relating  the  death  of  Drusus,  I  have  followed  the  greatest  part  of  our

historians, and the most faithful: I would not however omit a rumour which

in those times was so prevailing that it is not extinguished in ours; "that

Sejanus having by adultery gained Livia to the murder, had likewise engaged

by  constupration  the  affections  and  concurrence  of  Lygdus  the  eunuch;

because Lygdus was, for his youth and loveliness, dear to his master, and one

of his chief attendants: that when the time and place of poisoning, were by

the conspirators concerted; the eunuch carried his boldness so high, as to

charge upon Drusus a design of poisoning Tiberius; and secretly warning the

Emperor of this, advised him to shun the first draught offered him in the next

entertainment  at  his  son's:  that  the  old  man  possessed  with  this  fictitious

treason, after he had sate down to table, having received the cup delivered it

to Drusus, who ignorantly and gaily drank it off: that this heightened the

jealousy and apprehensions of Tiberius, as if through fear and shame his son

had swallowed the same death, which for his father he had contrived."

 
These bruitings of the populace, besides that they are supported by no certainauthor, may be easily refuted. For, who of common prudence (much less

Tiberius so long practised in great affairs) would to his own son, without

hearing him, present the mortal bane; with his own hands too, and cutting off

for ever all possibility of retraction? Why would he not rather have tortured

the minister of the poison? Why not inquired into the author of the poison?

Why  not  observed  towards  his  only  son,  a  son  hitherto  convicted  of  no

iniquity, that slowness and hesitation, which, even in his proceedings against

strangers, was inherent in him? But as Sejanus was reckoned the framer of

every wickedness, therefore, from the excessive fondness of Tiberius towards

him, and from the hatred of all others towards both, things the most fabulous

and direful were believed of them; besides that common fame is ever most

fraught with tales of horror upon the departure of Princes: in truth, the plan

and process of the murder were first discovered by Apicata, wife of Sejanus,

and laid open upon the rack by Eudemus and Lygdus. Nor has any writer

appeared so outrageous to charge it upon Tiberius; though in other instances

they have sedulously collected and inflamed every action of his. My own

purpose in recounting and censuring this rumour, was to blast, by so glaring

an example, the credit of groundless tales; and to request of those into whose

hands  our  present  undertaking  shall  come,  that  they  would  not  prefer

hearsays, void of credibility and rashly swallowed, to the narrations of truth

not adulterated with romance.

 
To proceed; whilst Tiberius was pronouncing in public the panegyric of his

son, the Senate and People assumed the port and accent of mourners, rather in

appearance than cordially; and in their hearts exulted to see the house of

Germanicus begin to revive. But this dawn of fortune, and the conduct of

Agrippina, ill disguising her hopes, quickened the overthrow of that house.

For Sejanus, when he saw the death of Drusus pass unrevenged upon his

murderers, and no public lamentation following it; undaunted as he was in

villainy since his first efforts had succeeded; cast about in himself, how he

might destroy the sons of Germanicus, whose succession to the Empire was

now unquestionable. They were three; and, from the distinguished fidelity of

their  governors,  and  incorruptible  chastity  of  Agrippina,  could  not  be  all

circumvented by poison. He therefore chose to attack her another way; to

raise alarms from the haughtiness and contumacy of her spirit; to rouse the

old hatred of Livia the elder, and the guilty mind of his late accomplice, Livia

the younger; that to the Emperor they might represent her "as elated with thecredit and renown of her fruitfulness; and that confiding in it, and in the zeal

of the populace, she grasped with open arms at the Empire." The young Livia

acted  in  this  engagement  by  crafty  calumniators;  amongst  whom  she  had

particularly  chosen  Julius  Posthumus,  a  man  every  way  qualified  for  her

purposes; as he was the adulterer of Mutilia Prisca, and thence a confidant of

her grandmother's; (for over the mind of the Empress, Prisca had powerful

influence) and by their means the old woman, in her own nature tender and

anxious of power, was rendered utterly irreconcilable to the widow of her

grandson. Such too as were nearest the person of Agrippina, were promoted

to be continually enraging her tempestuous heart by perverse representations.

 
This  year  also  brought  deputations  from  the  Grecian  cities;  one  from  the

people of Samos; one from those of Coös; the former to request that the

ancient right of Sanctuary in the Temple of Juno might be confirmed; the

latter to solicit the same confirmation for that of Aesculapius. The Samians

claimed  upon  a  decree  of  the  Council  of  Amphictyons,  the  supreme

Judicature of Greece, at the time when the Greeks by their cities founded in

Asia, possessed the maritime coasts. Nor had they of Coös a weaker title to

antiquity;  to  which  likewise  accrued  the  pretensions  of  the  place  to  the

friendship of Rome: for they had lodged in the Temple of Aesculapius all the

Roman  citizens  there,  when  by  the  order  of  King  Mithridates,  such  were

universally butchered throughout all the cities of Asia and the Isles. And now

after many complaints from the Praetors, for the most part ineffectual, the

Emperor  at  last  made  a  representation  to  the  Senate,  concerning  the

licentiousness of the players; "that in many instances they raised seditious

tumults, and violated the public peace; and, in many, promoted debauchery in

private families: that the Oscan Farce, formerly only the contemptible delight

of the vulgar, was risen to such a prevailing pitch of credit and enormity, that

it required the authority of the Senate to check it." The players therefore were

driven out of Italy.

 
The same year carried off one of the twins of Drusus, and thence afflicted the

Emperor with fresh woe; nor with less for the death of a particular friend. It

was Lucillius Longus, the inseparable companion of all the traverses of his

fortune  smiling  or  sad;  and,  of  all  the  Senators,  the  only  one  who

accompanied him in his retirement at Rhodes. For this reason, though but a

new man, the Senate decreed him a public funeral; and a statue to be placed,

at the expense of the Treasury, in the square of Augustus. For by the Senate,even  yet,  all  affairs  were  transacted;  insomuch  that  Lucillius  Capito,  the

Emperor's  Comptroller  in  Asia,  was,  at  the  accusation  of  the  Province,

brought upon his defence before them: the Emperor too upon this occasion

protested with great earnestness, "that from him Lucillius had no authority

but  over  his  slaves,  and  in  collecting  his  domestic  rents:  that  if  he  had

usurped the jurisdiction of Praetor, and employed military force, he had so far

violated  his  orders;  they  should  therefore  hear  the  allegations  of  the

Province."  Thus  the  accused  was  upon  trial  condemned.  For  this  just

vengeance, and that inflicted the year before on Caius Silanus, the cities of

Asia  decreed  a  temple  to  Tiberius,  and  his  mother,  and  the  Senate;  and

obtained leave to build it. For this concession Nero made a speech of thanks

to the Senators and his grandfather; a speech which charmed the affections of

his hearers, who, as they were full of the memory of Germanicus, fancied it

was him they heard, and him they saw. There was also in the youth himself

an  engaging  modesty,  and  a  gracefulness  becoming  a  princely  person:

ornaments which, by the known hatred that threatened him from Sejanus,

became still more dear and adored.

 
I am aware that most of the transactions which I have already related, or shall

hereafter  relate,  may  perhaps  appear  minute,  and  too  trivial  to  be

remembered. But, none must compare these my annals with the writings of

those who compiled the story of the ancient Roman People. They had for

their subjects mighty wars, potent cities sacked, great kings routed and taken

captive: or if they sometimes reviewed the domestic affairs of Rome, they

there found the mutual strife and animosities of the Consuls and Tribunes; the

agrarian and frumentary laws, pushed and opposed; and the lasting struggles

between the nobles and populace. Large and noble topics these, at home and

abroad, and recounted by the old historians with full room and free scope. To

me  remains  a  straitened  task,  and  void  of  glory;  steady  peace,  or  short

intervals of war; the proceedings at Rome sad and affecting; and a Prince

careless of extending the Empire: nor yet will it be without its profit to look

minutely into such transactions, as however small at first view, give rise and

motion to great events.

 
For,  all  nations  and  cities  are  governed  either  by  the  populace,  by  the

nobility, or by single rulers. As to the frame of a state chosen and compacted

out  of  all  these  three,  it  is  easier  applauded  than  accomplished;  or  if

accomplished, cannot be of long duration. So that, as during the Republic,either when the power of the people prevailed, or when the Senate bore the

chief sway; it was necessary to know the genius of the commonalty, and by

what measures they were to be humoured and restrained; and such too who

were thoroughly acquainted with the spirit of the Senate and leading men,

came to be esteemed skilful in the times, and men of prowess: so now when

that establishment is changed, and the present situation such as if one ruled

all; it is of advantage to collect and record these later incidents, as matters of

public  example  and  instruction;  since  few  can  by  their  own  wisdom

distinguish  between  things  crooked  and  upright;  few  between  counsels

pernicious and profitable; and since most men are taught by the fate of others.

But the present detail, however instructive, yet brings scanty delight. It is by

the descriptions and accounts of nations; by the variety of battles; by the

brave fall of illustrious captains, that the soul of the reader is engaged and

refreshed. For myself, I can only give a sad display of cruel orders, incessant

accusations, faithless friendships, the destruction of innocents, and endless

trials, all attended with the same issue, death and condemnation: an obvious

round  of  repetition  and  satiety!  Besides  that  the  old  historians  are  rarely

censured; nor is any man now concerned whether they chiefly magnify the

Roman or Carthaginian armies. But, of many who under Tiberius suffered

punishment, or were marked with infamy, the posterity are still subsisting; or

if the families themselves are extinct, there are others found, who from a

similitude of manners, think that, in reciting the evil doings of others, they

themselves are charged: nay, even virtue and a glorious name create foes, as

they expose in a light too obvious the opposite characters. But I return to my

undertaking.

 
Whilst  Cornelius  Cossus  and  Asinius  Agrippa  were  Consuls,  Cremutius

Cordus was arraigned for that, "having published annals and in them praised

Brutus, he had styled Cassius the last of the Romans:" a new crime, then first

created. Satrius Secundus and Pinarius Natta were his accusers; creatures of

Sejanus: a mortal omen this to the accused; besides that Tiberius received his

defence with a countenance settled into cruelty. He began it on this wise,

casting away all hopes of life:

 
"As to facts, I am so guiltless, Conscript Fathers, that my words only are

accused: but neither are any words of mine pointed against the Emperor, or

his mother; who are the only persons comprehended in the law concerning

violated majesty. It is alleged that I have praised Brutus and Cassius; menwhose lives and actions have been compiled by a cloud of writers, and their

memory treated by none but with honour. Titus Livius, an historian eminently

famous for eloquence and veracity, signalised Pompey with such abundant

encomiums, that he was thence by Augustus named Pompeianus; nor did this

prejudice their common friendship. Neither Scipio, nor Afranius, nor even

this same Cassius, nor this same Brutus, are anywhere mentioned by him as

traitors and parricides, the common nicknames now bestowed on them; but

often,  as  great  and  memorable  men.  The  writings  of  Asinius  Pollio  have

conveyed down the memory of the same men, under honourable characters.

Corvinus Messala gloried to have had Cassius for his general: and yet both

Pollio and Corvinus became signally powerful in wealth and honours under

Augustus. That book of Cicero's, in which he exalted Cato to the skies; what

other  animadversion  did  it  draw  from  Caesar  the  Dictator,  than  a  written

reply, in the same style and equality as if before his judges he had made it?

The letters of Marc Anthony; the speeches of Brutus, are full of reproaches,

and  recriminations  against  Augustus;  false  in  truth,  but  urged  with  signal

asperity: the poems of Bibaculus and those of Catullus, stuffed with virulent

satires against the Caesars, are still read. But even the deified Julius, even the

deified Augustus, bore all these invectives and disdained them; whether with

greater moderation or wisdom, I cannot easily say. For, if they are despised,

they fade away; if you wax wroth, you seem to avow them to be just.

 
"Instances from the Greeks I bring none: with them not the freedom only, but

even  the  licentiousness  of  speech,  is  unpunished:  or  if  any  correction  is

returned, it is only by revenging words with words. It has been ever allowed,

without restriction or rebuke, to pass our judgment upon those whom death

has withdrawn from the influence of affection and hate. Are Cassius and

Brutus now in arms? do they at present fill with armed troops the fields of

Philippi? or do I fire the Roman People, by inflammatory harangues, with the

spirit of civil rage? Brutus and Cassius, now above seventy years slain, are

still known in their statues, which even the conqueror did not abolish: and as

these exhibit their persons, why not the historian their characters? Impartial

posterity to every man repays his proper praise: nor will there be wanting

such as, if my death is determined, will not only revive the story of Cassius

and  Brutus,  but  even  my  story."  Having  thus  said  he  withdrew  from  the

Senate, and ended his life by abstinence. The Fathers condemned the books

to be by the Aediles burned; but they still continued concealed and dispersed:hence we may justly mock the stupidity of those, who imagine that they can,

by present power, extinguish the lights and memory of succeeding times: for,

quite otherwise, the punishment of writers exalts the credit of the writings:

nor did ever foreign kings, or any else, reap other fruit from it, than infamy to

themselves, and glory to the sufferers.

 
To  proceed;  for  this  whole  year  there  was  such  an  incessant  torrent  of

accusations, that even during the solemnity of the Latin festival, when Drusus

for his inauguration, as Governor of Rome, had ascended the Tribunal, he

was accosted by Calpurnius Salvianus with a charge against Sextus Marius: a

proceeding  openly  resented  by  the  Emperor,  and  thence  Salvianus  was

banished.  The  city  of  Cyzicus  was  next  accused,  "of  not  observing  the

established  worship  of  the  deified  Augustus;"  with  additional  crimes,  "of

violences  committed  upon  some  Roman  citizens."  Thus  that  city  lost  her

liberties;  which  by  her  behaviour  during  the  Mithridatic  war,  she  had

purchased; having in it sustained a siege; and as much by her own bravery, as

by the aid of Lucullus, repulsed the king, But Fonteius Capito, who had as

Proconsul governed Asia, was acquitted, upon proof that the crimes brought

against him by Vibius Serenus were forged: and yet the forgery drew no

penalty upon Serenus: nay, the public hate rendered him the more secure: for,

every accuser, the more eager and incessant he was, the more sacred and

inviolable  he  became:  the  sorry  and  impotent  were  surrendered  to

chastisement.

 
About the same time, the furthermost Spain besought the Senate by their

ambassadors, "that after the example of Asia, they might erect a temple to

Tiberius and his mother." Upon this occasion, the Emperor, always resolute

in contemning honours, and now judging it proper to confute those, who

exposed him to the popular censure, of having deviated into ambition; spoke

in this manner: "I know, Conscript Fathers, that it is generally blamed, and

ascribed to a defect of firmness in me, that when the cities of Asia petitioned

for this very thing, I withstood them not. I shall therefore now unfold at once

the  motives  of  my  silence  then,  and  the  rules  which  for  the  future  I  am

determined  to  observe.  Since  the  deified  Augustus  bad  not  opposed  the

founding  at  Pergamus  a  temple  to  himself  and  the  city  of  Rome;  I,  with

whom all his actions and sayings have the force of laws, followed an example

already  approved;  and  followed  it  the  more  cheerfully,  because  to  the

worship  bestowed  upon  me,  that  of  the  Senate  was  annexed.  But  as  theindulging of this, in one instance, will find pardon; so a general latitude of

being adored through every province, under the sacred representations of the

Deities, would denote a vain spirit; a heart swelled with ambition. The glory

too of Augustus will vanish, if by the promiscuous courtship of flattery it

comes to be vulgarly prostituted.

 
"For myself, Conscript Fathers, I am a mortal man; I am confined to the

functions of human nature; and if I well supply the principal place amongst

you, it suffices me. This I acknowledge to you; and this acknowledgment, I

would  have  posterity  to  remember.  They  will  do  abundant  right  to  my

memory, if they believe me to have been worthy of my ancestors; watchful of

the Roman state; unmoved in perils, and in maintaining the public interest,

fearless of private enmities. These are the temples which in your breasts I

would raise; these the fairest portraitures, and such as will endure. As to

temples and statues of stone, if the idol adored in them comes to be hated by

posterity, they are despised as his sepulchres. Hence it is I here invoke the

Gods, that to the end of my life they would grant me a spirit undisturbed, and

discerning in duties human and divine: and hence too I here implore our

citizens and allies, that whenever my dissolution comes, they would with

approbation  and  benevolent  testimonies  of  remembrance,  celebrate  my

actions and retain the odour of my name." And thenceforward he persevered

in slighting upon all occasions, and even in private conversation, this divine

worship of himself. A conduct which was by some ascribed to modesty; by

many to a conscious diffidence; by others to degeneracy of spirit. "Since the

most sublime amongst men naturally covet the most exalted honours: thus

Hercules and Bacchus amongst the Greeks, and with us Romulus, were added

to the society of the Gods: Augustus too had chosen the nobler part, and

hoped for deification: all the other gratifications of Princes were instantly

procured: one only was to be pursued insatiably; the praise and perpetuity of

their  name.  For  by  contemning  fame,  the  virtues  that  procure  it,  are

contemned."

 
Now Sejanus, intoxicated with excess of fortune, and moreover stimulated by

the importunity of Livia, who, with the restless passion of a woman, craved

the promised marriage, composed a memorial to the Emperor. For, it was

then the custom to apply to him in writing, though he were present. This of

Sejanus  was  thus  conceived:  "That  such  had  been  towards  him  the

benevolence  of  Augustus;  such  and  so  numerous,  since,  the  instances  ofaffection from Tiberius, that he was thence accustomed, without applying to

the Gods, to carry his hopes and prayers directly to the Emperors: yet of them

he had never sought a blaze of honours: watching and toils like those of

common soldiers, for the safeguard of the Prince, had been his choice and

ambition. However what was most glorious for him he had attained; to be

thought worthy of alliance with the Emperor: hence the source of his present

hopes: and, since he had heard that Augustus, in the disposal of his daughter,

had not been without thoughts even of some of the Roman knights; he begged

that if a husband were sought for Livia, Tiberius would remember his friend;

one whose ambition aimed no higher than the pure and disinterested glory of

the affinity: for that he would never abandon the burden of his present trust;

but  hold  it  sufficient  to  be,  by  that  means,  enabled  to  support  his  house

against the injurious wrath of Agrippina; and in this he only consulted the

security of his children. For himself; his own life would be abundantly long,

whenever finally spent in the ministry of such a Prince."

 
For a present answer, Tiberius praised the loyalty of Sejanus; recapitulated

cursorily the instances of his own favours towards him, and required time, as

it were for a thorough deliberation. At last he made this reply: "That all other

men  were,  in  their  pursuits,  guided  by  the  notions  of  convenience:  far

different was the lot and situation of Princes, who were in their action to

consider chiefly the applause and good liking of the public: he therefore did

not delude Sejanus with an obvious and plausible answer; that Livia could

herself determine whether, after Drusus, she ought again to marry, or still

persist  his  widow,  and  that  she  had  a  mother  and  grandmother,  nearer

relations and more interested to advise. He would deal more candidly with

him: and first as to the enmity of Agrippina; it would flame out with fresh

fury, if by the marriage of Livia, the family of the Caesars were rent as it

were into two contending parties: that even as things stood, the emulation of

these  ladies  broke  into  frequent  sallies,  and,  by  their  animosities,  his

grandsons were instigated different ways. What would be the consequence, if,

by such a marriage, the strife were inflamed? For you are deceived, Sejanus,

if you think to continue then in the same rank as now; or that Livia, she who

was first the wife of the young Caius Caesar, and afterwards the wife of

Drusus, will be of a temper to grow old with a husband no higher than a

Roman knight: nay, allowing that I suffered you afterwards to remain what

you are; do you believe that they who saw her father, they who saw herbrother, and the ancestors of our house, covered with the supreme dignities,

will ever suffer it? You in truth propose, yourself, to stand still in the same

station:  but  the  great  magistrates  and  grandees  of  the  state,  those  very

magistrates and grandees who, in spite of yourself, break in upon you, and in

all affairs court you as their oracle, make no secret of maintaining that you

have  long  since  exceeded  the  bounds  of  the  Equestrian  Order,  and  far

outgone in power all the confidants of my father; and from their hatred to

you, they also censure me. But still, Augustus deliberated about giving his

daughter to a Roman knight. Where is the wonder, if perplexed with a crowd

of distracting cares, and apprised to what an unbounded height above others

he  raised  whomsoever  he  dignified  with  such  a  match,  he  talked  of

Proculeius, and some like him; remarkable for the retiredness of their life,

and nowise engaged in the affairs of state? But if we are influenced by the

hesitation of Augustus, how much more powerful is the decision; since he

bestowed his daughter on Agrippa, and then on me? These are considerations

which  in  friendship  I  have  not  withheld:  however,  neither  your  own

inclinations, nor those of Livia, shall be ever thwarted by me. The secret and

constant purposes of my own heart towards you, and with what further ties of

affinity, I am contriving to bind you still faster to me; I at present forbear to

recount. Thus much only I will declare, that there is nothing so high but those

abilities, and your singular zeal and fidelity towards me, may justly claim: as

when opportunity presents, either in Senate, or in a popular assembly, I shall

not fail to testify."

 
In answer to this, Sejanus no longer soliciting the marriage, but filled with

higher  apprehensions,  besought  him  "to  resist  the  dark  suggestions  of

suspicion; to despise the pratings of the vulgar, nor to admit the hostile breath

of envy." And as he was puzzled about the crowds which incessantly haunted

his  house;  lest  by  keeping  them  off  he  might  impair  his  power;  or  by

encouraging them, furnish a handle for criminal imputations; he came to this

result, that he would urge the Emperor out of Rome, to spend his life remote

from thence in delightful retirements. From this counsel he foresaw many

advantages: upon himself would depend all access to the Emperor; all letters

and expresses would, as the soldiers were the carriers, be in great measure

under his direction; in a little time, the Prince, now in declining age, and then

softened by recess, would more easily transfer upon him the whole charge of

the Empire: he should be removed from the multitude of such as to maketheir court, attended him at Rome; and thence one source of envy would be

stopped. So that by discharging the empty phantoms of power, he should

augment the essentials. He therefore began by little and little to rail at the

hurry of business at Rome, the throng of people, the flock of suitors: he

applauded  "retirement  and  quiet;  where,  while  they  were  separate  from

irksome  fatigues,  nor  exposed  to  the  discontents  and  resentments  of

particulars, all affairs of moment were best despatched."

 
Next  were  heard  ambassadors  from  the  Lacedaemonians  and  Messenians,

about the right that each people claimed to the Temple of Diana Limenetis;

which the Lacedaemonians asserted to be theirs, "founded in their territory,

and dedicated by their ancestors," and offered as proofs the ancient authority

of their annals, and the hymns of the old poets. "It had been in truth taken

from them by the superior force of Philip of Macedon, when at war with him;

but restored afterwards by the judicial decision of Julius Caesar and Marc

Anthony." The Messenians, on the contrary, pleaded, "the ancient partition of

Peloponnesus  amongst  the  descendants  of  Hercules;  whence  the  territory

where the temple stood, had fallen to their king; and the monuments of that

allotment still remained, engraven in stone and old tables of brass; but, if the

testimony of histories and poets were appealed to; they themselves had the

most and the fullest. Nor had Philip, in his decision, acted by power, but from

equity: the same afterwards was the adjudgment of King Antigonus; the same

that  of  the  Roman  commander  Mummius.  Thus  too  the  Milesians  had

awarded, they who were by both sides chosen arbitrators: and thus lastly it

had  been  determined  by  Atidius  Geminus,  Praetor  of  Achaia."  The

Messenians therefore gained the suit. The citizens also of Segestum applied

on behalf of "the Temple of Venus on Mount Eryx; which fallen through age,

they desired might be restored." They represented the story of its origin and

antiquity; a well-pleasing flattery to Tiberius; who frankly took upon himself

the charge, as kinsman to the Goddess. Then was discussed the petition from

the citizens of Marseilles; and what they claimed, according to the precedent

of Publius Rutilius, was approved: for Rutilius, though by a law expelled

from Rome, had been by those of Smyrna adopted a citizen: and as Volcatius

Moschus,  another  exile,  had  found  at  Marseilles  the  same  privilege  and

reception, he had to their Republic, as to his country, left his estate.

 
During  the  same  Consuls,  a  bloody  assassination  was  perpetrated  in  the

nethermost Spain, by a boor in the territory of Termes. By him, Lucius Piso,Governor of the Province, as he travelled careless and unattended, relying on

the established peace, was surprised, and despatched at one deadly blow. The

assassin however escaped to a forest, by the fleetness of his horse; and there

dismissed  him:  from  thence  travelling  over  rocks  and  pathless  places,  he

baffled his pursuers: but their ignorance of his person was soon removed; for

his horse being taken and shown through the neighbouring villages, it was

thence learned who was the owner; so that he too was found; but when put to

the rack to declare his accomplices, he proclaimed with a mighty and assured

voice, in the language of his country, "that in vain they questioned him; his

associates might stand safely by and witness his constancy: and that no force

of torture could be so exquisite as from him to extort a discovery." Next day

as he was dragged back to the rack, he burst with a vehement effort from his

guard, and dashed his head so desperately against a stone, that he instantly

expired.  Piso  is  believed  to  have  been  assassinated  by  a  plot  of  the

Termestinians; as in exacting the repayment of some money, seized from the

public, he acted with more asperity, than a rough people could bear.

 
In the Consulship of Lentulus Getulicus and Caius Calvisius, the triumphal

ensigns were decreed to Poppeus Sabinus for having routed some clans of

Thracians, who living wildly on the high mountains, acted thence with the

more outrage and contumacy. The ground of their late commotion, not to

mention the savage genius of the people, was their scorn and impatience, to

have recruits raised amongst them, and all their stoutest men enlisted in our

armies; accustomed as they were not even to obey their native kings further

than their own humour, nor to aid them with forces but under captains of their

own choosing, nor to fight against any enemy but their own borderers. Their

discontents too were inflamed by a rumour which then ran current amongst

them; that they were to be dispersed into different regions; and exterminated

from their own, to be mixed with other nations. But before they took arms

and began hostilities, they sent ambassadors to Sabinus, to represent "their

past friendship and submission, and that the same should continue, if they

were provoked by no fresh impositions: but, if like a people subdued by war,

they  were  doomed  to  bondage;  they  had  able  men  and  steel,  and  souls

determined upon liberty or death." The ambassadors at the same time pointed

to  their  strongholds  founded  upon  precipices;  and  boasted  that  they  had

thither  conveyed  their  wives  and  parents;  and  threatened  a  war  intricate,

hazardous and bloody. 
Sabinus amused them with gentle answers till he could draw together his

army; while Pomponius Labeo was advancing with a legion from Moesia,

and King Rhoemetalces with a body of Thracians who had not renounced

their allegiance. With these, and what forces he had of his own, he marched

towards the foe, now settled in the passes of the forest: some more bold

presented themselves upon the hills: against the last, the Roman general first

bent his forces in battle, and without difficulty drove them thence, but with

small slaughter of the Barbarians, because of their immediate refuge. Here he

straight raised an encampment, and with a stout band took possession of a

hill, which extended with an even narrow ridge to the next fortress, which

was garrisoned by a great host of armed men and rabble: and as the most

resolute were, in the way of the nation, rioting without the fortification in

dances and songs, he forthwith despatched against them his select archers.

These, while they only poured in volleys of arrows at a distance did thick and

extensive execution; but, approaching too near, were by a sudden sally put in

disorder.  They  were  however  supported  by  a  cohort  of  the  Sigambrians,

purposely posted by Sabinus in readiness against an exigency; a people these,

equally terrible in the boisterous and mixed uproar of their voices and arms.

 
He afterwards pitched his camp nearer to the enemy; having in his former

entrenchments left the Thracians, whom I have mentioned to have joined us.

To them too was permitted "to lay waste, burn, and plunder; on condition that

their ravages were confined to the day; and that, at nights, they kept within

the camp, secure under guard." This restriction was at first observed; but,

anon lapsing into luxury, and grown opulent in plunder, they neglected their

guards, and resigned themselves to gaiety and banquetting, to the intoxication

and  sloth  of  wine  and  sleep.  The  enemy  therefore  apprised  of  their

negligence,  formed  themselves  into  two  bands;  one  to  set  upon  the

plunderers; the other to assault the Roman camp, with no hopes of taking it;

but only that the soldiers alarmed with shouts and darts, and all intent upon

their own defence, might not hear the din of the other battle: moreover to

heighten the terror, it was to be done by night. Those who assailed the lines

of the legions were easily repulsed: but, the auxiliary Thracians were terrified

with the sudden encounter, as they were utterly unprepared. Part of them lay

along the entrenchments; many were roaming abroad; and both were slain

with the keener vengeance, as they were upbraided "for fugitives and traitors,

who bore arms to establish servitude over their country and themselves." 
Next day Sabinus drew up his army in view of the enemy, on ground equal to

both; to try, if elated with their success by night, they would venture a battle:

and, when they still kept within the fortress, or on the cluster of hills, he

began to begird them with a siege; and strengthening his old lines and adding

new, enclosed a circuit of four miles. Then to deprive them of water and

forage, he straitened his entrenchment by degrees, and hemmed them in still

closer. A bulwark was also raised, whence the enemy now within throw, were

annoyed with discharges of stones, darts, and fire. But nothing aggrieved

them so vehemently as thirst, whilst only a single fountain remained amongst

a  huge  multitude  of  armed  men  and  families:  their  horses  too  and  cattle,

penned  up  with  the  people,  after  the  barbarous  manner  of  the  country,

perished for want of provender: amongst the carcasses of beasts lay those of

men; some dead of thirst, some of their wounds; a noisome mixture of misery

and  death;  all  was  foul  and  tainted  with  putrefaction,  stench,  and  filthy

contamination. To these distresses also accrued another, and of all calamities

the  most  consummate,  the  calamity  of  discord:  some  were  disposed  to

surrender; others proposed present death, and to fall upon one another. There

were some too who advised a sally, and to die avenging their deaths. Nor

were these last mean men, though dissenting from the rest.

 
But there was one of their leaders, his name Dinis, a man stricken in years,

who, by long experience, acquainted with the power and clemency of the

Romans, argued, "that they must lay down their arms, the same being the sole

cure for their pressing calamities;" and was the first who submitted, with his

wife and children to the conqueror. There followed him all that were weak

through sex or age, and such as had a greater passion for life than glory. The

young men were parted between Tarsa and Turesis; both determined to fall

with liberty: but Tarsa declared earnestly "for instant death; and that by it all

hopes and fears were at once to be extinguished;" and setting an example,

buried his sword in his breast. Nor were there wanting some who despatched

themselves the same way. Turesis and his band stayed for night: of which our

General  was  aware.  The  guards  were  therefore  strengthened  with

extraordinary reinforcements: and now with the night, darkness prevailed, its

horror heightened by outrageous rain; and the enemy with tumultuous shouts,

and by turns with vast silence, alarmed and puzzled the besiegers. Sabinus

therefore going round the camp, warned the soldiers, "that they should not be

misguided by the deceitful voice of uproar, nor trust to a feigned calm, andthence open an advantage to the enemy, who by these wiles sought it; but

keep immovably to their several posts; nor throw their darts at random."

 
Just then came the Barbarians, pouring in distinct droves: here, with stones,

with wooden javelins hardened in the fire, and with the broken limbs of trees,

they battered the palisade: there with hurdles, faggots and dead bodies, they

filled the trench: by others, bridges and ladders, both before framed, were

planted against the battlements; these they violently grappled and tore, and

struggled hand to hand with those who opposed them. The Romans, on the

other side, beat them back with their bucklers, drove them down with darts,

and hurled upon them great mural stakes and heaps of stones. On both sides

were powerful stimulations: on ours the hopes of victory almost gained, if we

persisted; and thence the more glaring infamy, if we recoiled: on theirs, the

last  struggle  for  their  life;  most  of  them,  too,  inspired  with  the  affecting

presence of their mothers and wives, and made desperate by their dolorous

wailings. The night was an advantage to the cowardly and the brave; by it,

the former became more resolute; by it, the latter hid their fear: blows were

dealt, the striker knew not upon whom; and wounds received, the wounded

knew  not  whence:  such  was  the  utter  indistinction  of  friend  and  foe.  To

heighten the general jumble and blind confusion, the echo from the cavities

of the mountain represented to the Romans the shouts of the enemy as behind

them:  hence  in  some  places  they  deserted  their  lines,  as  believing  them

already broken and entered: and yet such of the enemy, as broke through,

were very few. All the rest, their most resolute champions being wounded or

slain, were at the returning light driven back to their fort; where they were at

length forced to surrender; as did the places circumjacent of their own accord.

The  remainder  could  then  be  neither  forced  nor  famished;  as  they  were

protected by a furious winter, always sudden about Mount Haemus.

 
At  Rome,  discord  shook  the  Prince's  family:  and,  to  begin  the  series  of

destruction, which was to end in Agrippina, Claudia Pulchra her cousin was

accused; Domitius Afer the accuser. This man, just out of the Praetorship, in

estimation  small,  but  hasty  to  signalise  himself  by  some  notable  exploit

however heinous, alleged against her the "crimes of prostitution, of adultery

with Furnius, of magical execrations and poison prepared against the life of

the Emperor." Agrippina ever vehement, and then in a flame for the peril of

her kinswoman, flew to Tiberius, and by chance found him sacrificing to the

Emperor his father. Having got this handle for upbraiding him, she told him"that it ill became the same man to slay victims to the deified Augustus and to

persecute his children: his divine spirit was not transfused into dumb statues:

the  genuine  images  of  Augustus  were  the  living  descendants  from  his

celestial blood: she herself was one; one sensible of impending danger, and

now  in  the  mournful  state  of  a  supplicant.  In  vain  were  foreign  crimes

pretended against Pulchra; when the only cause of her concerted overthrow

was her affection for Agrippina, foolishly carried even to adoration; forgetful

as she was of the fate of Sosia, a condemned sufferer for the same fault." All

these bitter words drew small answer from the dark breast of Tiberius: he

rebuked her by quoting a Greek verse; "That she was therefore aggrieved,

because  she  did  not  reign:"  Pulchra  and  Furnius  were  condemned.  Afer,

having thus displayed his genius, and gained a declaration from Tiberius,

pronouncing him eloquent in his own independent right, was ranked with the

most  celebrated  orators:  afterwards  in  prosecuting  accusations,  or  in

protecting the accused, he flourished more in the fame of eloquence than in

that of uprightness: however, old age eminently sunk the credit and vigour of

his  eloquence;  while,  with  parts  decayed,  he  still  retained  a  passion  for

haranguing. [Footnote: Dum fessa mente, retinet silentii inpatientiam.]

 
Agrippina still fostering her wrath, and seized too with a bodily disorder,

received the Emperor, come purposely to see her, with many tears and long

silence. At last she accosted him with invidious expostulations and prayers;

"that he would relieve her solitude, and give her a husband. She was still

endowed with proper youth; to virtuous women there was no consolation but

that  of  marriage;  and  Rome  afforded  illustrious  men  who  would  readily

assent to entertain the wife of Germanicus, and his children." Tiberius was

not ignorant to what mighty power in the state, that demand tended; but, that

he might betray no tokens of resentment or fear, he left her, though instant

with him, without an answer. This passage, not related by the authors of our

annals, I found in the commentaries of her daughter Agrippina; her, who was

the mother of the Emperor Nero, and has published her own life with the

fortunes of her family.

 
As  to  Agrippina;  still  grieving  and  void  of  foresight,  she  was  yet  more

sensibly dismayed by an artifice of Sejanus, who employed such, as under

colour of friendship warned her, "that poison was prepared for her, and that

she must shun eating at her father-in-law's table." She was a stranger to all

dissimulation: so that as she sat near him at table, she continued stately andunmoved; not a word, not a look escaped her, and she touched no part of the

meat.  Tiberius  observed  her,  whether  accidentally,  or  that  he  was  before

apprised; and, to be convinced by a more powerful experiment, praising the

apples  that  stood  before  him,  presented  some  with  his  own  hand  to  his

daughter-in-law. This only increased the suspicion of Agrippina; and, without

ever putting them to her mouth, she delivered them to the servants. For all

this, the reserved Tiberius let not a word drop from him openly; but, turning

to his mother; "There was no wonder," he said, "if he had really taken harsh

measures with her, who thus charged him as a poisoner." Hence a rumour

spread, "that her doom was contrived; and that the Emperor not daring to

pursue it publicly, chose to have her despatched in secret."

 
Tiberius, as a means to divert upon other matters the popular talk, attended

assiduously the deliberations of the Senate; and there heard for many days the

several Ambassadors from Asia, mutually contending, "in what city should

be built the temple lately decreed." For this honour eleven cities strove, with

equal ambition, though different in power: nor did the pleas urged by all,

greatly vary; namely, "the antiquity of their original, and their distinguished

zeal  for  the  Roman  People,  during  their  several  wars  with  Perseus,

Aristonicus,  and  other  kings."  But  the  Trallians,  the  Laodiceans,  the

Magnesians  and  those  of  the  Hypaepis,  were  at  once  dismissed,  as

insufficient for the charge. Nor, in truth, had they of Ilium, who represented,

"that Troy was the mother of Rome," any superior advantage, besides the

glory  of  antiquity.  The  plea  of  the  Halicarnassians  took  some  short

consideration: they asserted, "that for twelve hundred years, no earthquake

had shaken their town; and that they would fix in a solid rock the foundations

of the temple." The same considerations were urged by the inhabitants of

Pergamus; where already was erected a temple to Augustus; a distinction

which was judged sufficient for them. The cities too of Ephesus and Miletus

seemed fully employed in the ceremonies of their own distinct deities; the

former in those of Diana; the other, in those of Apollo. Thus the dispute was

confined to Sardis and Smyrna. The first recited a decree of the Etrurians,

which owned them for kinsmen: "for that Tyrrhenus and Lydus, sons of King

Atys, having between them divided their people, because of their multitude,

Lydus re-settled in his native country; and it became the lot of Tyrrhenus to

find out a fresh residence; and by the names of these chiefs the parted people

came afterwards to be called, Lydians in Asia, Tyrrhenians in Italy. That theopulence  of  the  Lydians  spread  yet  farther,  by  their  colonies  sent  under

Pelops into Greece, which from him afterwards took its name." They likewise

urged "the letters of our Generals; their mutual leagues with us during the war

of Macedon; their plenty of rivers, temperate climate, and the fertility of the

circumjacent country."

 
The  Smyrnaeans  having  likewise  recounted  their  ancient  establishment,

"whether Tantalus, the son of Jupiter; or Theseus, the son also of a God; or

one of the old Amazons, were their founder;" proceeded to considerations in

which they chiefly trusted; their friendly offices to the Roman People, having

aided them with a naval force, not in their foreign wars only, but in those

which infested Italy. "It was they who first reared a temple to the City of

Rome, in the Consulship of Marcus Porcius; then, in truth, when the power of

the  Roman  People  was  already  mighty,  but  however  not  yet  raised  to  its

highest glory; for the city of Carthage still stood, and potent kings governed

Asia. Witness too their generosity to Sylla, when the condition of his army

ready to famish in a cruel winter and a scarcity of clothes, being related to the

citizens of Smyrna then assembled; all that were present divested themselves

of their raiments, and sent them to our legions." Thus when the votes of the

Senators were gathered, the pretensions of Smyrna were preferred. It was also

moved by Vibius Marsus, that Lentulus, to whom had fallen the province of

Asia, should be attended by a Legate extraordinary, to supervise the building

of the temple; and as Lentulus himself through modesty declined to choose

one, several who had been Praetors were drawn by lot, and the lot fell upon

Valerius Naso.

 
In the meantime, according to a purpose long meditated, and from time to

time deferred, Tiberius at last retired to Campania; in profession, to dedicate

a  temple  to  Jupiter  at  Capua,  and  one  at  Nola  to  Augustus;  but  in  truth

determined to remove, for ever, from Rome. The cause of his departure, I

have before referred to the stratagems of Sejanus; but though in it I have

followed most of our authors; yet, since after the execution of Sejanus, he

persisted for six years in the like dark recess; I am rather influenced by a

stronger  probability,  that  the  ground  of  his  absence  is  more  justly  to  be

ascribed to his own spirit, while he strove to hide in the shades of solitude,

what in deeds he proclaimed, the rage of his cruelty and lust. There were

those who believed that, in his old age, he was ashamed of the figure of his

person;  for  he  was  very  lean,  long  and  stooping,  his  head  bald,  his  faceulcerous, and for the most besmeared with salves: he was moreover wont,

during his recess at Rhodes, to avoid the public, and cover his debauches in

secrecy.  It  is  also  related  that  he  was  driven  from  Rome  by  the  restless

aspiring  of  his  mother,  whom  he  scorned  to  admit  a  partner  in  the

sovereignty; nor yet could entirely seclude, since as her gift he had received

the  sovereignty  itself.  For,  Augustus  had  deliberated  about  setting

Germanicus at the head of the Roman state; his sister's grandson, and one

adored by all men: but subdued by the solicitations of his wife, he adopted

Tiberius; and caused Tiberius to adopt Germanicus. With this grandeur of her

own procuring, Livia upbraided her son; and even reclaimed it.

 
His  going  was  narrowly  accompanied;  by  one  Senator,  Cocceius  Nerva,

formerly  Consul,  and  accomplished  in  the  knowledge  of  the  laws;  and,

besides Sejanus, by one dignified Roman knight, Curtius Atticus. The rest

were men of letters, chiefly Greeks; whose conversation pleased and amused

him.  The  skilled  in  astrology  declared,  "that  he  had  left  Rome  in  such  a

conjunction of the planets, as for ever to exclude his return." Hence a source

of destruction to many, who conjectured his end to be at hand, and published

their conjectures: for, it was an event too incredible to be foreseen, that for

eleven years he should of choice be withdrawn from his country. The sequel

discovered the short bounds between the art and the falsehood of the art, and

what obscurities perplex even the facts it happens to foretell. That he should

never return to Rome, proved not to be falsely said: as to everything else

about  him  they  were  perfectly  in  the  dark;  since  he  still  lived,  never  far

distant, sometimes in the adjacent champain, sometimes on the neighbouring

shore, often under the very walls of the city; and died at last in the fulness

and extremity of age.

 
There  happened  to  Tiberius,  about  that  time,  an  accident,  which,  as  it

threatened  his  life,  fired  the  empty  prognostics  at  Rome;  but  to  himself

proved matter of more confidence in the friendship and faith of Sejanus. They

were  eating  in  a  cave  at  a  villa,  thence  called  Spelunca,  between  the

Amyclean  Sea  and  the  mountains  of  Fondi:  it  was  a  native  cave,  and  its

mouth fell suddenly in, and buried under it some of the attendants: hence

dread seized all, and they who were celebrating the entertainment fled: as to

Sejanus; he covered the Emperor's body with his own, and stooping upon his

knees  and  hands,  exposed  himself  to  the  descending  ruin;  such  was  the

posture he was found in by the soldiers, who came to their relief. He grewmightier  from  thence;  and  being  now  considered  by  Tiberius  as  one

regardless of himself, all his counsels, however bloody and destructive, were

listened to with blind credulity: so that he assumed the office of a judge

against the offspring of Germanicus, and suborned such as were to act the

parts of accusers, and especially to pursue and blacken Nero, the next in

succession; a young Prince modest indeed, but forgetful of that restraint and

circumspection which his present situation required. He was misguided by his

freedmen and the retainers to his house; who eager to be masters of power,

animated  him  with  intemperate  counsels;  "that  he  would  show  a  spirit

resolute and assured; it was what the Roman People wished, what the armies

longed for: nor would Sejanus dare then to resist; though he now equally

insulted the tameness of an old man and the sloth of a young one."

 
While he listened to these and the like suggestions, there escaped him, no

expressions, in truth, of any criminal purpose; but sometimes such as were

resentful and unguarded: these were catched up by the spies placed upon him,

and  charged  against  him  with  aggravations;  neither  was  he  allowed  the

privilege  of  clearing  himself.  Several  threatening  appearances  moreover

dismayed him: some avoided to meet him; others having just paid him the

salute, turned instantly away: many, in the midst of conversation, broke off

and  left  him;  while  the  creatures  of  Sejanus  stood  still  fearlessly  by  and

sneered upon him. For Tiberius; he always entertained him with a stern face,

or a hollow smile; and whether the youth spoke or said nothing, there were

crimes in his words, crimes in his silence: nor was he safe even at the dead of

night; since his uneasiness and watchings, nay, his very sighs and dreams

were, by his wife, divulged to her mother Livia, and by Livia to Sejanus; who

had also drawn his brother Drusus into the combination, by tempting him

with the immediate prospect of Empire, if his elder brother, already sinking,

were  once  set  effectually  aside.  The  genius  of  Druses  naturally  furious,

instigated  besides  by  a  passion  for  power,  and  by  the  usual  hate  and

competition  between  brothers,  was  further  kindled  by  the  partiality  of

Agrippina, who was fonder of Nero. However, Sejanus did not so far favour

Drusus,  but  that  against  him  too  he  was  even  then  ripening  the  studied

measures of future destruction; as he knew him to be violent, and thence

more obnoxious to snares.

 
In the end of the year departed these eminent persons; Asinius Agrippa, of

ancestors  more  illustrious  than  ancient,  and  in  his  own  character  notunworthy of them: and Quintus Haterius, of a Senatorian family, and himself,

while he yet lived, famous for eloquence: but the monuments of his genius,

since published, are not equally esteemed. In truth, he prevailed more by

rapidity than accuracy: insomuch that, as the elaborate compositions of others

flourish after them; so that enchanting melody of voice in Haterius, with that

fluency of words which was personal to him, died with him.

 
In the Consulship of Marcus Licinius and Lucius Calpurnius, the casualty of

an instant, its beginning unforeseen, and ended as soon as begun, equalled in

calamity  the  slaughter  and  overthrow  of  mighty  armies.  One  Atilius  had

undertaken to erect an amphitheatre at Fidena, [Footnote: Castel Giubileo,

near Rome.] there to exhibit a combat of gladiators: he was of the race of

freedmen, and as he began it from no exuberance of wealth, nor to court

popularity amongst the inhabitants, but purely for the meanness of gain, he

neither  established  solid  foundations,  nor  raised  the  timber-work  with

sufficient compactness. Thither thronged from Rome those of every sex and

age, eager for such shows; as during the reign of Tiberius they were debarred

from diversions at home; and, the nearer the place, the greater the crowds:

hence the calamity was the more dreadful; for, as the theatre was surcharged

with  the  multitude,  the  structure  burst,  and  sinking  violently  in,  while  its

extremities rushed impetuously out, huge was the press of people, who intent

upon the gladiators within, or gathered round the walls, were crushed by the

deadly ruin, and even buried under it. And verily, they who in the first fury of

the havoc were smitten with final death, escaped as far as in such a doleful

disaster they could escape, the misery of torture: much more to be lamented

were  those,  who  bereft  of  joints  and  pieces  of  their  body,  were  yet  not

forsaken of life; those who by day could with their eyes behold their wives

and children imprisoned in the same ruins; and by night could distinguish

them by their groans, and howlings.

 
Now others from abroad excited by the sad tidings, found here their several

sorrows: one bewailed his brother, one his kinsman, another his parents: even

they whose friends or kindred were absent on a different account, were yet

terrified:  for,  as  it  was  not  hitherto  distinctly  known  upon  whom  the

destruction  had  lighted,  the  dread  was  widened  by  uncertainty.  When  the

ruins began to be removed, great about the dead was the concourse of the

living; frequent the kisses and embraces of tenderness and sorrow: and even

frequent the contention about the propriety of the dead; where the featuresdistorted  by  death  or  bruises,  or  where  parity  of  age  or  resemblance  of

person,  had  confounded  the  slain,  and  led  into  mistakes  their  several

claimers. Fifty thousand souls were destroyed or maimed by this sad stroke: it

was therefore for the future provided by a decree of Senate, "that no man

under the qualification of four hundred thousand sesterces, should exhibit the

spectacle  of  gladiators;  and  no  amphitheatre  should  be  founded  but  upon

ground  manifestly  solid."  Atilius  was  punished  with  exile.  To  conclude;

during  the  fresh  pangs  of  this  calamity,  the  doors  of  the  Grandees  were

thrown open; medicines were everywhere furnished; they who administered

medicines, were everywhere employed to attend: and at that juncture the city

though sorrowful of aspect, seemed to have recalled the public spirit of the

ancient Romans; who, after great battles, constantly relieved the wounded,

sustained them by liberality, and restored them with care.

 
The public agonies from this terrible blow, were not yet deadened, when

another supervened; and the city felt the affliction and violence of fire, which

with uncommon rage utterly consumed Mount Caelius. "It was a deadly and

mournful year," they said, "and under boding omens the Prince had formed

the  design  of  his  absence."  It  is  the  way  this  of  the  multitude;  who  to

malignant counsels are wont to ascribe events altogether fortuitous. But the

Emperor dissipated their murmurs, by bestowing on each sufferer money to

the value of his sufferings: hence he had the thanks of men of rank, in the

Senate; and was by the populace rewarded with applauses, "for that without

the views of ambition, without the application of friends, he had of his own

accord even sought out the unknown, and by his bounty relieved them." It

was likewise moved and decreed in Senate, "that Mount Caelius should be for

the future styled Mount Augustus, since there the statue of Tiberius, standing

in  the  house  of  Junius  the  Senator,  escaped  unhurt  in  the  flames,  though

devouring all round them:" it was remembered, that the same rare exemption

had formerly happened to Claudia Pulchra; that her statue being twice spared

by the fury of fire, had thence been placed and consecrated by our ancestors

in the Temple of the Mother of the Gods. Thus sacred were the Claudian

race, and dear to the deities; and therefore the place, where the Gods had

testified such mighty honour towards the Prince, ought to be dignified with

consecration.

 
It will not be impertinent to insert here, that this mount was of old named

Querquetulanus,  from  a  grove  of  oak  which  grew  thick  upon  it.  It  wasafterwards called Mount Caelius, from Caeles Vibenna, who having led to

Rome a body of Tuscan auxiliaries, was presented with that settlement by

Tarquinius Priscus, or some other of our kings; for in this particular, writers

differ: about other circumstances there remains no dispute; that these forces

were very numerous, and extended their dwellings all along the plain below,

as far as the Forum. Hence the Tuscan Street, so called after these strangers.

 
Tiberius, having dedicated the temples in Campania; though he had by an

edict warned the public, "that none should interrupt his quiet;" and though

soldiers were posted to keep off all confluence from the neighbouring towns;

nevertheless, hating the towns themselves, and the colonies, and every part in

the continent, imprisoned himself in Capreae, [Footnote: Capri.] an island

disjoined from the point of the Cape of Surrentum by a channel of three

miles. I should chiefly believe that he was taken with its solitude, as the sea

above it is void of havens, as the stations for the smallest vessels are few and

difficult, and as none could put in unperceived by the Guards. The genius of

the climate is mild in winter, from the shelter of a mountain which intercepts

the rigour of the winds: its summers are refreshed by gales from the west; and

the  sea  open  all  round  it,  makes  a  delightful  view:  from  thence  too  was

beheld a most lovely landscape, before the eruptions of Mount Vesuvius had

changed the face of the prospect. It is the tradition of fame that the Greeks

occupied the opposite region, and that Capreae was particularly inhabited by

the Teleboi. However it were, Tiberius then confined his retirement to twelve

villas,  their  names  famous  of  old  and  their  structure  sumptuous.  And  the

more intent he had formerly been upon public cares, he became now so much

the  more  buried  in  dark  debauches,  and  resigned  over  to  mischievous

privacy: for, there remained still in him his old bent to suspicions, and rash

faith in informers; qualities which even at Rome Sejanus had always fostered,

and here inflamed more vigorously; his devices against Agrippina and Nero

being no longer a secret. About them guards were placed, by whom every

petty  circumstance,  the  messages  they  sent  or  received,  their  visits  and

company, their open behaviour, their private conversation, were all as it were

minuted into journals: there were others, too, instructed to warn them to fly to

the armies in Germany; or that embracing the statue of the deified Augustus

in the great Forum, they would there implore the aid and protection of the

Senate and People of Rome. And these counsels, though rejected by them,

were fathered and charged upon them, as just ripe for execution.  

THE ANNALS:
BOOK YV
                                        BOOK V 
                                      A.D. 29-31.

 
In the Consulship of Rubellius and Fusius, each surnamed Geminus, died

Julia  Augusta,  the  mother  of  Tiberius,  in  the  extremity  of  age.  She  was

descended  from  the  Claudian  house;  adopted  through  her  father  into  the

Livian  family;  into  the  Julian,  by  Augustus;  and  both  by  adoption  and

descent, signally noble: her first marriage was with Tiberius Nero; and by

him she had children: her husband, after the surrender of Perusia, [Footnote:

Perugia.] in the Civil War, became a fugitive; but, upon peace made between

Sextus  Pompeius  and  the  Triumvirate,  returned  to  Rome.  Afterwards,

Octavius Caesar smitten with her beauty, snatched her from her husband;

whether  with  or  against  her  own  inclinations,  is  uncertain;  but  with  such

precipitation, that, without staying for her delivery, he married her yet big

with child by Tiberius. Henceforward she had no issue; but, by the marriage

of  Germanicus  and  Agrippina,  her  blood  came  to  be  mixed  with  that  of

Augustus  in  their  great-grandchildren.  In  her  domestic  deportment,  she

conformed to the venerable model of antiquity; but with more complaisance

than was allowed by the ladies of old: an easy courteous wife, an ambitious

mother;  and  well  comporting  with  the  nice  arts  of  her  husband,  and  the

dissimulation of her son: her funeral was moderate, and her last will lay long

unfulfilled:  her  encomium  was  pronounced  in  public  by  Caligula,  her

grandson, [Footnote: Great-grandson.] afterwards Emperor.

 
Tiberius by a letter excused himself to the Senate, for not having paid his last

offices  to  his  mother;  and,  though  he  rioted  in  private  luxury  without

abatement, pleaded "the multitude of public affairs." He likewise abridged the

honours decreed to her memory, and, of a large number, admitted but very

few: for this restriction he pretended modesty, and added, "that no religious

worship should be appointed her; for that the contrary was her own choice."

Nay, in a part of the same letter, he censured feminine friendships; obliquely

upbraiding the Consul Fusius, a man highly distinguished by the favour of

Augusta, and dexterous to engage and cajole the affections of women; a gay

talker, and one accustomed to play upon Tiberius with biting sarcasms; the

impressions of which never die in the hearts of Princes.

 
From  this  moment,  the  domination  waxed  completely  outrageous  and

devouring: for while she lived, some refuge still remained, as the observanceof Tiberius towards his mother was ever inviolate; nor durst Sejanus arrogate

precedence  of  the  authority  of  a  parent:  but  now,  as  let  loose  from  all

restraint, they broke out with unbridled fury: so that letters were despatched

avowedly against Agrippina and Nero; and as they were read in the Senate

soon after the death of Augusta, the people believed them to have been sent

before and by her suppressed. The expressions were elaborately bitter; and

yet by them no hostile purpose of taking arms, no endeavour to change the

State, was objected to the youth; but only "the love of boys, and other impure

pleasures:" against Agrippina he durst not even feign so much; and therefore

arraigned "her haughty looks, her impetuous and stubborn spirit." The Senate

were struck with deep silence and affright: but, as particular men will always

be  drawing  personal  favour  from  public  miseries,  there  were  some  who,

having  no  hopes  founded  upon  uprightness,  demanded  that  "they  should

proceed  upon  the  letters:"  amongst  these  the  foremost  in  zeal  was  Cotta

Messalinus, with a terrible motion: but, the other leading men, and chiefly the

magistrates, were embarrassed by fear: for Tiberius, though he had sent them

a flaming invective, left all the rest a riddle.

 
In the Senate was one Junius Rusticus, appointed by the Emperor to keep a

journal of their proceedings, and therefore thought well acquainted with his

purposes. This man, by some fatal impulse (for he had never before shown

any instance of magnanimity) or blinded by deceitful policy, while forgetful

of present and impending dangers, he dreaded future possibilities, joined the

party that hesitated, and even warned the Consuls "not to begin the debate:"

he argued "that in a short moment the highest affairs might take a new turn:

and an interval ought to be allowed to the old man to change his passion into

remorse." At the same time, the people, carrying with them the images of

Agrippina and Nero, gathered about the Senate, and proclaiming their good

wishes for the prosperity of the Emperor, cried earnestly, "that the letters

were  counterfeit;  and,  against  the  consent  of  the  Prince,  the  doom  of  his

family was pursued:" so that nothing tragical was that day transacted. There

were also dispersed amongst them several speeches, said to have been uttered

in Senate by the Consulars, as their motions and advices against Sejanus; but

all framed, and with the more petulance as the several authors exercised their

satirical wit in the dark. Hence Sejanus boiled with greater rage, and hence

had  a  handle  for  branding  the  Senate,  "that  by  them  the  anguish  and

resentments of the Prince were despised: the people were revolted; popularand  disaffected  harangues  were  publicly  read  and  listened  to:  new  and

arbitrary acts of Senate were passed and published: what more remained, but

to  arm  the  populace  and  place  at  their  head,  as  leaders  and  Imperial

commanders, those whose images they had already chosen for standards?"

 
Tiberius having therefore repeated his reproaches against his grandson and

daughter-in-law: having chastised the people by an edict, and complained to

the Senate, "that by the fraud of a single Senator the Imperial dignity should

be  battled  and  insulted,  required  that  the  whole  affair  should  be  left  to

himself, entire and untouched." The Senate hesitated no longer, but instantly

proceeded, not now in truth to decree penalties and capital vengeance; for

that  was  forbid  them;  but  to  testify  "how  ready  they  were  to  inflict  just

punishments, and that they were only interrupted by the power and pleasure

of the Prince."…

 
[Here begins a lamentable chasm in this "Annal" for almost three years; and

by it we have lost the detail of the most remarkable incidents in this reign, the

exile of Agrippina into the Isle of Pandataria; of Nero, into that of Pontia; and

the  murder  of  both  there  by  the  orders  of  Tiberius:  the  conspiracy  and

execution of Sejanus, with that of all his friends and dependents: the further

wickedness of Livia, and her death.]

 
Now though the rage of the populace was expiring, and though most men

were mollified by former executions; it was determined to condemn the other

children  of  Sejanus.  They  were  therefore  carried  both  to  prison,  the  boy

sensible of his impending doom; but the girl so ignorant, that she frequently

asked; "For what offence? and whither did they drag her? she would do so no

more; and they might take the rod and whip her." The writers of that time

relate,  "that  as  it  was  a  thing  unheard,  for  a  virgin  to  suffer  capital

punishment, she was deflowered by the executioner just before he tied the

rope; and that being both strangled, the tender bodies of these children were

cast into the place where the carcasses of malefactors are exposed, before

they are flung into the Tiber."…

 \

S
THE 7

/
ANNALS:

7

 
 

}

N

i

7

\
N

\

 

  

BOOK VI
                                      BOOK VI 
                                      A.D. 32-37.

 
Cneius  Domitius  and  Camillus  Scribonianus  had  begun  their  Consulship,

when the Emperor, having crossed the channel between Capreae [Footnote:

Capri.]  and  Surrentum,  [Footnote:  Sorrento.]  sailed  along  the  shore  of

Campania; unresolved whether he should proceed to Rome; or counterfeiting

a  show  of  coming,  because  he  had  determined  not  to  come.  He  often

approached to the neighbourhood of the city, and even visited the gardens

upon the Tiber; but at last resumed his old retirement, the gloomy rocks and

solitude of the sea, ashamed of his cruelties, and abominable lusts; in which

he rioted so outrageously, that after the fashion of royal tyrants, the children

of ingenuous parentage became the objects of his pollution: nor in them was

he struck with a lovely face only, or the graces of their persons; but in some

their amiable and childish innocence, in others their nobility and the glory of

their  ancestors,  became  the  provocatives  of  his  unnatural  passion.  Then

likewise were devised the filthy names, till then unknown, of the Sellarii and

Spintriae,  expressing  the  odious  lewdness  of  the  place,  and  the  manifold

postures and methods of prostitution practised in it. For supplying his lust

with  these  innocent  victims,  he  entertained,  in  his  service  professed

procurers, to look them out and carry them off. The willing they encouraged

with presents, the backward they terrified with threats; and upon such parents

or kindred as withheld the infants, they exercised force, seizure, and, as upon

so many captives, every species of licentious rage.

 
At Rome in the beginning of the year, as if the iniquities of Livia had been

but just discovered, and not even long since punished, furious orders were

passed against her statues too, and memory; with another, "that the effects of

Sejanus should be taken from the public treasury, and placed in that of the

Emperor:" as if this vain translation could any wise avail the State. And yet

such was the motion of these great names, the Scipios, the Silani, and the

Cassii; who urged it, each almost in the same words, but all with mighty zeal

and earnestness: when all on a sudden, Togonius Gallus, while he would be

thrusting his own meanness amongst names so greatly illustrious, became the

object of derision: for he besought the Prince "to choose a body of Senators

of whom twenty, drawn by lot and under arms, should wait upon him and

defend his person, as often as he entered the Senate." He had been weak

enough  to  credit  a  letter  from  the  Emperor,  requiring  "the  guard  andprotection of one of the Consuls, that he might return in safety from Capreae

to  Rome."  Tiberius  however  returned  thanks  to  the  Senate  for  such  an

instance  of  affection;  but  as  he  was  wont  to  mix  pleasantry  with  things

serious, he asked, "How was it to be executed? what Senators were to be

chosen?  who  to  be  omitted?  whether  always  the  same,  or  a  continued

succession? whether young Senators, or such as had borne dignities? whether

those who were Magistrates, or those exercising no magistracy? moreover

what a becoming figure they would make, grave Senators, men of the gown,

under arms at the entrance of the Senate! in truth he held not his life of such

importance,  to  have  it  thus  protected  by  arms."  So  much  in  answer  to

Togonius, without asperity of words; nor did he farther, than this, press them

to cancel the motion.

 
But Junius Gallio escaped not thus. He had proposed "that the Praetorian

soldiers, having accomplished their term of service, should thence acquire the

privilege of sitting in the fourteen rows of the theatre allotted to the Roman

knights."  Upon  him  Tiberius  fell  with  violent  wrath,  and,  as  if  present,

demanded, what business had he with the soldiers? men whose duty bound

them to observe only the orders of the Emperor, and from the Emperor alone

to receive their rewards. Gallio had forsooth discovered a recompense which

had escaped the sagacity of the deified Augustus? Or was it not rather a

project started by a mercenary of Sejanus, to raise sedition and discord; a

project tending to debauch the rude minds of the soldiers with the show and

bait  of  new  honour;  to  corrupt  their  discipline,  and  set  them  loose  from

military restrictions? This reward, had the studied flattery of Gallio; who was

instantly expelled the Senate, and then Italy: nay, it became a charge upon

him,  that  his  exile  would  be  too  easy,  having  for  the  place  of  it  chosen

Lesbos, an island noble and delightful; he was therefore haled back to Rome

and confined a prisoner in the house of a Magistrate. Tiberius in the same

letter  demanded  the  doom  of  Sextus  Paconianus,  formerly  Praetor,  to  the

extreme joy of the Senate, as he was a man bold and mischievous, one armed

with snares, and continually diving into the purposes and secret transactions

of all men; and one chosen by Sejanus, for plotting the overthrow of Caligula.

When this was now laid open, the general hate and animosities long since

conceived against him, broke violently out, and had he not offered to make a

discovery, he had been instantly condemned to death.

 
The  next  impeached  was  Cotta  Messalinus,  the  author  of  every  the  mostbloody counsel, and thence long and intensely hated. The first opportunity

was therefore snatched to fall upon him with a combination of crimes; as that

he had called Caius Caligula by the feminine name of Caia Caligula, and

branded  him  with  constuprations  of  both  kinds;  that  when  he  celebrated

among the Priests the birthday of Augusta, he had styled the entertainment a

funeral supper; and that complaining of the great sway of Marcus Lepidus,

and  of  Lucius  Arruntius,  with  whom  he  had  a  suit  about  money,  he  had

added;  "they  indeed  will  be  supported  by  the  Senate,  but  I  by  my  little

Tiberius."  [Footnote:  Tiberiolus  meus.]  Of  all  this  he  stood  exposed  to

conviction by men of the first rank in Rome; who being earnest to attack him,

he appealed to Caesar: from whom soon after a letter was brought in behalf

of Cotta; in it he recounted "the beginning of their friendship," repeated "his

many  good  services  to  himself,"  and  desired  "that  words  perversely

construed, and humorous tales told at an entertainment, might not be wrested

into crimes."

 
Most  remarkable  was  the  beginning  of  that  letter;  for  in  these  words  he

introduced it: "What to write you, Conscript Fathers, or in what manner to

write, or what at all not to write at this instant; if I can determine, may all the

Deities, Gods and Goddesses, doom me still to more cruel agonies than those

under which I feel myself perishing daily." So closely did the bloody horror

of his cruelties and infamy haunt this man of blood, and became his torturers!

Nor was it at random what the wisest of all men [Footnote: Socrates.] was

wont to affirm, that if the hearts of tyrants were displayed, in them might be

seen deadly wounds and gorings, and all the butcheries of fear and rage;

seeing what the severity of stripes is to the body, the same to the soul is the

bitter anguish of cruelty, lust, and execrable pursuits. To Tiberius not his

imperial  fortune,  not  his  gloomy  and  inaccessible  solitudes  could  ensure

tranquillity; nor exempt him from feeling and even avowing the rack in his

breast and the avenging furies that pursued him.

 
After this, it was left to the discretion of the Senate to proceed as they listed

against  Caecilianus  the  Senator,  "who  had  loaded  Cotta  with  many

imputations;"  and  it  was  resolved,  "to  subject  him  to  the  same  penalties

inflicted upon Aruseius and Sanquinius, the accusers of Lucius Annuntius."

A more signal instance of honour than this had never befallen Cotta; who

noble  in  truth,  but  through  luxury  indigent,  and,  for  the  baseness  of  his

crimes, detestable, was by the dignity of this amends equalled in character tothe most venerable reputation and virtues of Arruntius.

 
About the same time died Lucius Piso, the Pontiff; and, by a felicity, then

rare in so much splendour and elevation, died by the course of nature. The

author  he  never  himself  was  of  any  servile  motion,  and  ever  wise  in

moderating such motions from others, where necessity enforced his assent.

That his father had sustained the sublime office of Censor, I have before

remembered: he himself lived to fourscore years, and for his warlike feats in

Thrace, had obtained the glory of triumph. But from hence arose his most

distinguished  glory,  that  being  created  Governor  of  Rome,  a  jurisdiction

newly  instituted,  and  the  more  difficult,  as  not  yet  settled  into  public

reverence, he tempered it wonderfully and possessed it long.

 
For,  of  old,  to  supply  the  absence  of  the  Kings,  and  afterwards  of  the

Consuls,  that  the  city  might  not  remain  without  a  ruler,  a  temporary

Magistrate was appointed to administer justice, and watch over exigencies:

and it is said that by Romulus was deputed Denter Romulius; Numa Marcius,

by Tullus Hostilius; and by Tarquin the Proud, Spurius Lucretius. The same

delegation was made by the Consuls; and there remains still a shadow of the

old institution, when during the Latin festival, one is authorised to discharge

the Consular function. Moreover, Augustus during the Civil Wars, committed

to Cilnius Maecenas of the Equestrian Order, the Government of Rome and

of all Italy. Afterwards, when sole master of the Empire, and moved by the

immense multitude of people and the slowness of relief from the laws, he

chose a Consular to bridle the licentiousness of the slaves, and to awe such

turbulent citizens as are only quiet from the dread of chastisement. Messala

Corvinus  was  the  first  invested  with  this  authority,  and  in  a  few  days

dismissed, as a man insufficient to discharge it. It was then filled by Taurus

Statilius, who, though very ancient, sustained it with signal honour. After him

Piso held it for twenty years, with a credit so high and uninterrupted, that he

was distinguished with a public funeral, by decree of the Senate.

 
A motion was thereafter made in Senate by Quinctilianus, Tribune of the

People, concerning a Book of the Sibyl, which Caninius Gallus, one of the

College of Fifteen, had prayed "might be received by a decree amongst the

rest  of  that  Prophetess."  The  decree  passed  without  opposition,  but  was

followed by letters from Tiberius. In them having gently chid the Tribune, "as

young and therefore unskilled in the ancient usages," he upbraided Gallus,"that  he  who  was  so  long  practised  in  the  science  of  sacred  ceremonies,

should  without  taking  the  opinion  of  his  own  college,  without  the  usual

reading and deliberation with the other Priests, deal, by surprise, with a thin

Senate, to admit a prophetic book of an uncertain author." He also advertised

them "of the conduct of Augustus, who, to suppress the multitude of fictious

predictions everywhere published under the solemn name of the Sibyl, had

ordained, that within a precise day, they should be carried to the City Praetor;

and made it unlawful to keep them in private hands." The same had likewise

been decreed by our ancestors, when after the burning of the capitol in the

Social War, the Rhymes of the Sibyl (whether there were but one, or more)

were everywhere sought, in Samos, Ilium, and Erythrae, through Africa too

and Sicily and all the Roman colonies, with injunctions to the Priests, that, as

far  as  human  wit  could  enable  them,  they  would  separate  the  genuine.

Therefore, upon this occasion also, the book was subjected to the inspection

of the Quindecimvirate.

 
Under the same Consuls, the dearth of corn had nigh raised a sedition. The

populace for many days urged their wants and demands in the public theatre,

with  a  licentiousness  towards  the  Emperor,  higher  than  usual.  He  was

alarmed with this bold spirit, and censured the Magistrates and Senate, "that

they had not by the public authority quelled the people." He recounted "the

continued supplies of grain which he had caused to be imported; from what

provinces,  and  in  how  much  greater  abundance  than  those  procured  by

Augustus." So that for correcting the populace, a decree passed framed in the

strain of ancient severity: nor less vigorous was the edict published by the

Consuls. His own silence, which he hoped would be taken by the people as

an instance of moderation, was by them imputed to his pride.

 
In the meanwhile, the whole band of accusers broke loose upon those who

augmented their wealth by usury, in contradiction to a law of Caesar the

Dictator,  "for  ascertaining  the  terms  of  lending  money,  and  holding

mortgages in Italy;" a law waxed long since obsolete, through the selfish

passions of men, sacrificing public good to private gain. Usury was, in truth,

an  inveterate  evil  in  Rome,  and  the  eternal  cause  of  civil  discord  and

seditions, and therefore restrained even in ancient times, while the public

manners were not yet greatly corrupted. For, first it was ordained by a law of

the twelve tables, "that no man should take higher interest than twelve in the

hundred;" when, before, it was exacted at the pleasure of the rich. Afterwardsby a regulation of the Tribunes it was reduced to six, and at last was quite

abolished. By the people, too, repeated statutes were made, for obviating all

elusions, which by whatever frequent expedients repressed, were yet through

wonderful  devices  still  springing  up  afresh.  Gracchus  the  Praetor  was

therefore now appointed to inquire into the complaints and allegations of the

accusers;  but,  appalled  with  the  multitude  of  those  threatened  by  the

accusation, he had recourse to the Senate. The Fathers also were dismayed

(for of this fault not a soul was guiltless) and sought and obtained impunity

from the Prince; and a year and six months were granted for balancing all

accounts between debtors and creditors, agreeably to the direction of the law.

 
Hence a great scarcity of money: for, besides that all debts were at once

called in; so many delinquents were condemned, that by the sale of their

effects, the current coin was swallowed up in the public treasury, or in that of

the Emperor. Against this stagnation, the Senate had provided, "that two-

thirds of the debts should by every creditor be laid out upon lands in Italy."

But  the  creditors  warned  in  the  whole;  [Footnote:  Demanded  payment  in

full.] nor could the debtors without breach of faith divide the payment. So

that at first, meetings and entreaties were tried; and at last it was contested

before the Praetor. And the project applied as a remedy; namely, that the

debtor should sell, and the creditor buy, had a contrary operation: for the

usurers hoarded up all their treasure for purchasing of lands, and the plenty of

estates to be sold, miserably sinking the price; the more men were indebted,

the more difficult they found it to sell. Many were utterly stripped of their

fortunes; and the ruin of their private patrimony drew headlong with it that of

their  reputation  and  all  public  preferment.  The  destruction  was  going  on,

when the Emperor administered relief, by lending a hundred thousand great

sesterces for three years, without interest; provided each borrower pawned to

the people double the value in inheritance. [Footnote: Gave a security to the

State, on landed property.] Thus was credit restored; and by degrees private

lenders too were found.

 
About  the  same  time,  Claudia,  daughter  to  Marcus  Silanus,  was  given  in

marriage  to  Caligula,  who  had  accompanied  his  grandfather  to  Capreae,

having  always  hid  under  a  subdolous  guise  of  modesty,  his  savage  and

inhuman spirit: even upon the condemnation of his mother, even for the exile

of his brothers, not a word escaped him, not a sigh, nor groan. So blindly

observant of Tiberius, that he studied the bent of his temper and seemed topossess it; practised his looks, imitated the change and fashion of his dress,

and affected his words and manner of expression. Hence the observation of

Passienus the Orator, grew afterwards famous, "that never lived a better slave

nor a worse master." Neither would I omit the presage of Tiberius concerning

Galba,  then  Consul.  Having  sent  for  him  and  sifted  him  upon  several

subjects, he at last told him in Greek, "and thou, Galba, shalt hereafter taste

of Empire;" signifying his late and short sovereignty. This he uttered from his

skill in astrology, which at Rhodes he had leisure to learn; and Thrasullus for

his teacher, whose capacity he proved by this following trial.

 
As often as he consulted this way concerning any affair, he retired to the roof

of the house, attended by one freedman trusted with the secret. This man

strong of body, but destitute of letters, guided along the astrologer, whose art

Tiberius meant to try, over solitary precipices (for upon a rock the house

stood) and, as he returned, if any suspicion arose that his predictions were

vain, or that the author designed fraud, cast him headlong into the sea, to

prevent his making discoveries. Thrasullus being therefore led over the same

rocks, and minutely consulted, his answers were full, and struck Tiberius; as

approaching Empire and many future revolutions were specifically foretold

him.  The  artist  was  then  questioned,  "whether  he  had  calculated  his  own

nativity, and thence presaged what was to befall him that same year, nay, that

very day?" Thrasullus surveying the positions of the stars, and calculating

their  aspects,  began  at  first  to  hesitate,  then  to  quake,  and  the  more  he

meditated, being more and more dismayed with wonder and dread, he at last

cried out, "that over him just then hung a boding danger and well-nigh fatal."

Forthwith Tiberius embraced him, congratulated him "upon his foresight of

perils, and his security from them;" and esteeming his predictions as so many

oracles, held him thenceforward in the rank of his most intimate friends.

 
For myself, while I listen to these and the like relations, my judgment wavers,

whether things human are in their course and rotation determined by Fate and

immutable necessity, or left to roll at random. For upon this subject the wisest

of the ancients and those addicted to their Sects, are of opposite sentiments.

[Footnote: The Epicureans.] Many are of opinion "that to the Gods neither the

generation of us men nor our death, and in truth neither men nor the actions

of men, are of any importance or concernment: and thence such numberless

calamities  afflict  the  upright,  while  pleasure  and  prosperity  surround  the

wicked."  Others  [Footnote:  The  Stoics.]  hold  the  contrary  position,  andbelieve "a Fate to preside over events; a fate however not resulting from

wandering stars, but coeval with the first principles of things, and operating

by the continued connection of natural causes. Yet their philosophy leaves

our course of life in our own free option; but that after the choice is made, the

chain of consequences is inevitable: neither is that good or evil, which passes

for  such  in  the  estimation  of  the  vulgar:  many,  who  seem  wounded  with

adversity,  are  yet  happy;  numbers,  that  wallow  in  wealth,  are  yet  most

wretched: since the first often bear with magnanimity the blows of fortune;

and the latter abuse her bounty in baneful pursuits." For the rest, it is common

to multitudes of men "to have each their whole future fortunes determined

from the moment of their birth: or if some events thwart the prediction, it is

through the mistakes of such as pronounce at random, and thence debase the

credit of an art, which, both in ages past and our own, hath given signal

instances of its certainty." For, to avoid lengthening this digression, I shall

remember in its order, how by the son of this same Thrasullus the Empire

was predicted to Nero.

 
During the same Consulship flew abroad the death of Asinius Gallus: that he

perished through famine was undoubted; but whether of his own accord, or

by  constraint,  was  held  uncertain.  The  pleasure  of  the  Emperor  being

consulted, "whether he would suffer him to be buried;" he was not ashamed

to grant such a piece of mock mercy, nor even to blame the anticipations of

casualty,  which  had  withdrawn  the  criminal,  before  he  was  publicly

convicted: as if during three intermediate years between his accusation and

his death, there wanted time for the trial of an ancient Consular, and the

father  of  so  many  Consulars.  Next  perished  Drusus,  condemned  by  his

grandfather to be starved; but by gnawing the weeds upon which he lay, he

by that miserable nourishment protracted life the space of nine days. Some

authors relate that, in case Sejanus had resisted and taken arms, Macro had

instructions to draw the young man out of confinement (for he was kept in

the palace) and set him at the head of the people: afterwards because a report

ran, "that the Emperor was about to be reconciled to his daughter- in-law and

grandson;" he chose rather to gratify himself by cruelty, than the public by

relenting.

 
Tiberius not satiated with the death of Drusus, even after death pursued him

with cruel invectives, and, in a letter to the Senate, charged him with "a body

foul with prostitution; with a spirit breathing destruction to his own family,and rage against the Republic;" and ordered to be recited "the minutes of his

words and actions, which had been long and daily registered," A proceeding

more black with horror could not be devised! That for so many years, there

should be those expressly appointed, who were to note down his looks, his

groans, his secret and extorted murmurs; that his grandfather should delight

to hear the treacherous detail, to read it, and to the public expose it, would

appear a series of fraud, meanness and amazement beyond all measure of

faith, were it not for the letters of Actius the Centurion, and Didymus the

Freedman;  who  in  them  declare,  particularly,  the  names  of  the  slaves  set

purposely to abuse and provoke Drusus, with the several parts they acted;

how one struck him going out of his chamber, and how another filled him

with terrors and dismay. The Centurion too repeated, as matter of glory, his

own language to Drusus, language full of outrage and barbarity, with the

words uttered by him under the agonies of famine; that, at first, feigning

disorder of spirit, he vented, in the style of a madman, dismal denunciations

against Tiberius; but after all hopes of life had forsaken him, then, in steady

and deliberate imprecations, he invoked the direful vengeance of the Gods,

"that as he had slaughtered his son's wife, slaughtered the son of his brother,

and his son's sons, and with slaughters had filled his own house; so they

would in justice to the ancestors of the slain, in justice to their posterity,

doom him to the dreadful penalties of so many murders." The Senators, in

truth,  upon  this  raised  a  mighty  din,  under  colour  of  detesting  these

imprecations: but it was dread which possessed them, and amazement, that he

who had been once so dark in the practice of wickedness, and so subtle in the

concealment of his bloody spirit, was arrived at such an utter insensibility of

shame, that he could thus remove, as it were, the covert of the walls, and

represent  his  own  grandson  under  the  ignominious  chastisement  of  a

Centurion, torn by the barbarous stripes of slaves, and imploring in vain the

last sustenance of life.

 
Before the impressions of this grief were worn away, the death of Agrippina

was published. I suppose she had lived thus long upon the hopes, which from

the  execution  of  Sejanus  she  had  conceived;  but,  feeling  afterwards  no

relaxation of cruelty, death grew her choice: unless she were bereaved of

nourishment, and her decease feigned to have been of her own seeking. For,

Tiberius  raged  against  her  with  abominable  imputations,  reproaching  her

"with lewdness; as the adulteress of Asinius Gallus; and that upon his deathshe became weary of life." But these were none of her crimes: Agrippina

impatient  of  an  equal  lot,  and  eager  for  rule,  had  thence  sacrificed  to

masculine ambition all the passions and vices of women. The Emperor added,

"that she departed the same day on which Sejanus had suffered as a traitor

two  years  before,  and  that  the  same  ought  to  be  perpetuated  by  a  public

memorial."  Nay,  he  boasted  of  his  clemency,  in  "that  she  had  not  been

strangled, and her body cast into the charnel of malefactors." For this, as for

an instance of mercy the Senate solemnly thanked him, and decreed "that, on

the seventeenth of October, the day of both their deaths, a yearly offering

should be consecrated to Jupiter for ever."

 
Not long after, Cocceius Nerva, in full prosperity of fortune, in perfect vigour

of body, formed a purpose of dying. As he was the incessant companion of

the  Prince,  and  accomplished  in  the  knowledge  of  all  laws  divine  and

humane,  Tiberius  having  learnt  his  design,  was  earnest  to  dissuade  him,

examined his motives, joined entreaties, and even declared, "how grievous to

his own spirit it would prove, how grievous to his reputation, if the nearest of

his  friends  should  relinquish  life,  without  any  cause  for  dying."  Nerva

rejected  his  reasoning,  and  completed  his  purpose  by  abstinence.  It  was

alleged, by such as knew his thoughts, that the more he saw into the dreadful

source and increase of public miseries, the more transported with indignation

and fear, he resolved to make an honest end, in the bloom of his integrity, e'er

his  life  and  credit  were  assaulted.  Moreover  the  fall  of  Agrippina,  by  a

reverse hardly credible, procured that of Plancina. She was formerly married

to Cneius Piso; and, though she exulted publicly for the death of Germanicus,

yet when Piso fell, she was protected by the solicitations of Augusta, nor less

by  the  known  animosity  of  Agrippina.  But  as  favour  and  hate  were  now

withdrawn,  justice  prevailed,  and  being  questioned  for  crimes  long  since

sufficiently manifest, she executed with her own hand that vengeance, which

was rather too slow than too severe,

 
In  the  Consulship  of  Paulus  Fabius  and  Lucius  Vitellius,  after  a  long

vicissitude of ages, the phoenix arrived in Egypt, and furnished the most

learned  of  the  natives  and  Greeks  with  matter  of  large  and  various

observations concerning that miraculous bird. The circumstances in which

they agree, with many others, that, however disputed, deserve to be known,

claim a recital here. That it is a creature sacred to the sun, and in the fashion

of its head, and diversity of feathers, distinct from other birds, all who havedescribed its figure, are agreed; about the length of its life, relations vary. It is

by the vulgar tradition fixed at five hundred years: but there are those, who

extend it to one thousand four hundred and sixty-one; and assert that the three

former phoenixes appeared in reigns greatly distant, the first under Sesostris,

the next under Amasis; and that one was seen under Ptolomy the third King

of  Egypt  of  the  Macedonian  race,  and  flew  to  the  city  of  Heliopolis,

accompanied  by  a  vast  host  of  other  birds  gazing  upon  the  wonderful

stranger. But these are, in truth, the obscure accounts of antiquity: between

Ptolomy and Tiberius the interval was shorter, not two hundred and fifty

years: hence some have believed that the present was a spurious phoenix, and

derived not its origin from the territories of Arabia, since it observed nothing

of the instinct which ancient tradition attributes to the genuine: for that the

latter having completed his course of years, just before his death builds a nest

in his native land, and upon it sheds a generative power, from whence arises a

young one, whose first care, when he is grown, is to bury his father: neither

does he undertake it unadvisedly, but by collecting and fetching loads of

myrrh, tries his strength in great journeys; and as soon as he finds himself

equal to the burden, and fit for the long flight, he rears upon his back his

father's body, carries it quite to the altar of the sun, and then flies away.

These are uncertain tales, and their uncertainty heightened by fables; but that

this bird has been sometimes seen in Egypt, is not questioned.

 
The same year the city suffered the grievous calamity of fire, which burnt

down that part of the Circus contiguous to Mount Aventine and the Mount

itself: a loss which turned to the glory of the Prince, as he paid in money the

value  of  the  houses  destroyed.  A  hundred  thousand  great  sesterces  he

expended in this bounty, which proved the more grateful to the people as he

was  ever  sparing  in  private  buildings:  in  truth,  his  public  works  never

exceeded two, the Temple of Augustus and the scene [Footnote: The stage.]

of Pompey's Theatre; nor, when he had finished both, did he dedicate either,

whether obstructed by old age, or despising popularity. For ascertaining the

damage  of  particulars,  the  four  sons-in-law  of  Tiberius  were  appointed,

Cneius  Domitius,  Cassius  Longinus,  Marcus  Vincinus  and  Rubellius

Blandus; assisted by Publius Petronius, nominated by the Consuls. To the

Emperor likewise were decreed several honours, variously devised according

to the different drift and genius of such as proposed them. Which of these he

meant to accept, or which to reject, the approaching issue of his days, hasburied  in  uncertainty.  For  not  long  after,  Cneius  Acerronius  and  Caius

Pontius commenced Consuls; the last under Tiberius. The power of Macro

was already excessive; who, as he had at no time neglected the favour of

Caligula, courted it now more and more earnestly every day. After the death

of Claudia, whom I have mentioned to have been espoused to the young

Prince,  he  constrained  Ennia  his  own  wife  to  stimulate  the  affections  of

Caligula and to secure him by a promise of marriage. The truth is, he was one

that denied nothing that opened his way to sovereignty; for although of a

tempestuous genius, he had yet in the school of his grandfather, well acquired

all the hollow guises of dissimulation.

 
His  spirit  was  known  to  the  Emperor;  hence  he  was  puzzled  about

bequeathing the Empire: and first as to his grandsons; the son of Drusus was

nearer in blood, and dearer in point of affection, but as yet a child; the son of

Germanicus had arrived at the vigour of youth, and the zeal of the people

followed him, a motive this to his grandfather, only to hate him. He had even

debates with himself concerning Claudius, because of solid age and naturally

inclined  to  honest  pursuits;  but  the  defect  of  his  faculties  withstood  the

choice. In case he sought a successor apart from his own family, he dreaded

lest the memory of Augustus, lest the name of the Caesars should come to be

scorned and insulted. For, it was not so much any study of his, to gratify the

present generation and secure the Roman State, as to perpetuate to posterity

the grandeur of his race. So that his mind still wavering and his strength

decaying, to the decision of fortune he permitted a counsel to which he was

now unequal. Yet he dropped certain words whence might be gathered that he

foresaw the events and revolutions which were to come to pass after him: for,

he upbraided Macro, by no dark riddle, "that he forsook the setting sun and

courted the rising:" and of Caligula, who upon some occasional discourse

ridiculed Sylla, he foretold, "that he would have all Sylla's vices, and not one

of his virtues." Moreover, as he was, with many tears, embracing the younger

of his grandsons, and perceived the countenance of Caligula implacable and

provoked; "thou," said he, "wilt slay him, and another shall slay thee." But,

however  his  illness  prevailed,  he  relinquished  nothing  of  his  vile

voluptuousness; forcing patience, and feigning health. He was wont too to

ridicule the prescriptions of physicians, and all men who, after the age of

thirty, needed to be informed by any one else, what helped or hurted their

constitutions. 
At Rome, the while, were sown the sanguinary seeds of executions to be

perpetrated even after Tiberius. Laelius Balbus had with high treason charged

Acutia, some time the wife of Publius Vitellius; and, as the Senate were, after

her  condemnation,  decreeing  a  reward  to  the  accuser,  the  same  was

obstructed by the interposition of Junius Otho, Tribune of the People: hence

their mutual hate, which ended in the exile of Otho. Thereafter Albucilla,

who had been married to Satrius Secundus, him that revealed the conspiracy

of Sejanus, and herself famous for many amours, was impeached of impious

rites devised against the Prince. In the charge were involved, as her associates

and adulterers, Cneius Domitius, Vibius Marsus, and Lucius Arruntius. The

noble  descent  of  Domitius  I  have  above  declared:  Marsus  too  was

distinguished by the ancient dignities in his house, and himself illustrious for

learning. The minutes, however, transmitted to the Senate imported, "that in

the  examination  of  the  witnesses,  and  torture  of  the  slaves,  Macro  had

presided:" neither came these minutes accompanied with any letter from the

Emperor against the accused. Hence it was suspected, that, while he was ill,

and  perhaps  without  his  privacy,  the  accusations  were  in  great  measure

forged by Macro, in consequence of his notorious enmity to Arruntius.

 
Domitius  therefore  by  preparing  for  his  defence,  and  Marsus  by  seeming

determined to famish, both protracted their lives. Arruntius chose to die; and

to the importunity of his friends, urging him to try delays and evasions, he

answered, "that the same measures were not alike honourable to all men: his

own life was abundantly long; nor had he wherewithal to reproach himself,

save that he had submitted to bear thus far an old age loaded with anxieties,

exposed to daily dangers, and the cruel sport of power; long hated as he was

by Sejanus, now by Macro, always by some reigning minister; hated through

no fault of his own, but as one irreconcilable to baseness and the iniquities of

power. He might, in truth, outlive and avoid the few and last days of Tiberius:

but how escape the youth of his heir? If upon Tiberius at such an age, and

after such consummate experience, the violent spirit of unbridled dominion

had wrought with such efficacy, as entirely to transport and change him; was

it likely that Caligula, he who had scarce outgrown his childhood, a youth

ignorant of all things, or nursed and principled in the worst, would follow a

course more righteous under the guidance of Macro; the same Macro, who,

for destroying Sejanus, was employed as the more wicked of the two, and had

since by more mischiefs and cruelties torn and afflicted the Commonweal?For  himself;  he  foresaw  a  servitude  yet  more  vehement,  and  therefore

withdrew  at  once  from  the  agonies  of  past  and  of  impending  tyranny."

Uttering these words, with the spirit of a prophet, he opened his veins. How

wisely  Arruntius  anticipated  death,  the  following  times  will  terribly

demonstrate. For Albucilla; she aimed at her own life, but the blow being

impotent, she was by order of Senate dragged to execution in the prison.

Against the ministers of her lusts it was decreed, "that Grasidius Sacerdos,

formerly  Praetor,  should  be  exiled  into  an  island;  Pontius  Fregellanus  be

degraded from the Senate; and that upon Laelius Balbus the same penalty be

inflicted:"  his  punishment  particularly  proved  matter  of  joy,  as  he  was

accounted a man of pestilent eloquence, and prompt to attack the innocent.

 
About  the  same  time,  Sextus  Papinius  of  a  Consular  family,  chose  on  a

sudden a frightful end, by a desperate and precipitate fall. The cause was

ascribed to his mother, who, after many repulses, had by various allurements

and the stimulations of sensuality, urged him to practices and embarrassments

from whence, only by dying, he could devise an issue. She was therefore

accused in the Senate; and, though in a prostrate posture she embraced the

knees of the Fathers, and pleaded "the tenderness and grief of a mother, the

imbecility of a woman's spirit under such an affecting calamity;" with other

motives of pity in the same doleful strain; she was banished Rome for ten

years, till her younger son were past the age of lubricity.

 
As  to  Tiberius;  already  his  body,  already  his  spirits  failed  him;  but  his

dissimulation failed him not. He exerted the same vigour of mind, the same

energy in his looks and discourse; and even sometimes studied to be gay, by

it to hide his declension however notorious. So that, after much shifting of

places, he settled at the Promontory of Misenum, in a villa of which Lucullus

was once Lord. There it was discovered that his end was at hand, by this

device.  In  his  train  was  a  physician,  his  name  Charicles,  signal  in  his

profession, one, in truth, not employed to govern the Prince's health, but wont

however to afford his counsel and skill. Charicles, as if he were departing to

attend his own affairs, under the appearance of paying duty and kissing his

hands,  touched  his  pulse.  But  the  artifice  beguiled  not  Tiberius;  for  he

instantly ordered the entertainment to be served up; whether incensed, and

thence the more smothering his wrath, is uncertain: but, at table he continued

beyond his wont, as if he meant that honour only for a farewell to his friend.

But for all this Charicles satisfied Macro, "that the flame of life was expiring,and could not outlast two days." Hence the whole court was filled with close

consultations, and expresses were despatched to the generals and armies. On

the 16th of March, so deep a swoon seized him, that he was believed to have

paid the last debt of mortality: insomuch that Caligula, in the midst of a great

throng,  paying  their  congratulations,  was  already  appearing  abroad,  to

assume  the  first  offices  of  sovereignty,  when  sudden  notice  came,  "that

Tiberius had recovered his sight and voice, and, to strengthen his fainting

spirits, had called for some refreshment." Hence dread seized all, and the

whole concourse about Caligula dispersed, every man resuming false sorrow,

or feigning ignorance: he himself was struck speechless, and thus fallen from

the highest hopes, waited for present death. Macro continued undismayed,

and ordering the apartment to be cleared, caused the feeble old man to be

smothered with a weight of coverings. Thus expired Tiberius in the seventy-

eighth year of his age.

 
He was the son of Nero, and on both sides a branch of the Claudian House;

though his mother had been ingrafted by adoptions into the Livian, and next

into the Julian stock. From his first infancy, his life was chequered by various

turns and perils: for, then he followed, like an exile, his proscribed father; and

when taken in quality of a step-son into the family of Augustus, he long

struggled there with many potent rivals, during the lives of Marcellus and

Agrippa; next of the young Caesars, Caius and Lucius. His brother Drusus

too eclipsed him, and possessed more eminently the hearts of the Roman

People. But above all, his marriage with Julia, most egregiously threatened

and  distressed  him;  whether  he  bore  the  prostitutions  of  his  wife,  or

relinquished  the  daughter  of  Augustus.  Upon  his  return  thereafter  from

Rhodes, he occupied for twelve years the Prince's family, now bereft of heirs,

and nigh four-and-twenty ruled the Roman State. His manners also varied

with the several junctures of his fortune: he was well esteemed while yet a

private man; and, in discharging public dignities under Augustus, of signal

reputation: covert and subdolous in feigning virtue so long as Germanicus

and Drusus survived: a mixed character of good and evil during the days of

his mother: detestably cruel; but secret in his lewdness, while he loved or

feared Sejanus: at last he abandoned himself, at once, to the rage of tyranny

and the sway of his lusts: for, he had then conquered all the checks of shame

and  fear,  and  thenceforth  followed  only  the  bent  of  his  own  abominable

spirit. TACITUS:
GERMANIA

 
A TREATISE OF THE SITUATION, CUSTOMS, AND PEOPLE OF                                      GERMANY.

 
 

 
The whole of Germany is thus bounded; separated from Gaul, from Rhoetia

and Pannonia, by the rivers Rhine and Danube; from Sarmatia and Dacia by

mutual fear, or by high mountains: the rest is encompassed by the ocean,

which  forms  huge  bays,  and  comprehends  a  tract  of  islands  immense  in

extent: for we have lately known certain nations and kingdoms there, such as

the war discovered. The Rhine rising in the Rhoetian Alps from a summit

altogether rocky and perpendicular, after a small winding towards the west, is

lost in the Northern Ocean. The Danube issues out of the mountain Abnoba,

one very high but very easy of ascent, and traversing several nations, falls by

six streams into the Euxine Sea; for its seventh channel is absorbed in the

Fenns.

 
The Germans, I am apt to believe, derive their original from no other people;

and are nowise mixed with different nations arriving amongst them: since

anciently those who went in search of new dwellings, travelled not by land,

but were carried in fleets; and into that mighty ocean so boundless, and, as I

may call it, so repugnant and forbidding, ships from our world rarely enter.

Moreover, besides the dangers from a sea tempestuous, horrid and unknown,

who would relinquish Asia, or Africa, or Italy, to repair to Germany, a region

hideous and rude, under a rigorous climate, dismal to behold or to manure;

[Footnote: To cultivate.] unless the same were his native country? In their old

ballads (which amongst them are the only sort of registers and history) they

celebrate Tuisto, a God sprung from the earth, and Mannus his son, as the

fathers and founders of the nation. To Mannus they assign three sons, after

whose names so many people are called; the Ingaevones, dwelling next the

ocean; the Herminones, in the middle country; and all the rest, Istaevones.

Some, borrowing a warrant from the darkness of antiquity, maintain that the

God had more sons, that thence came more denominations of people, the

Marsians, Cambrians, Suevians, and Vandalians, and that these are the names

truly genuine and original. For the rest, they affirm Germany to be a recent

word, lately bestowed: for that those who first passed the Rhine and expulsed

the Gauls, and are now named Tungrians, were then called Germans: and

thus by degrees the name of a tribe prevailed, not that of the nation; so that by

an  appellation  at  first  occasioned  by  terror  and  conquest,  they  afterwardschose  to  be  distinguished,  and  assuming  a  name  lately  invented  were

universally called Germans.

 
They have a tradition that Hercules also had been in their country, and him

above all other heroes they extol in their songs when they advance to battle.

Amongst them too are found that kind of verses by the recital of which (by

them called Barding) they inspire bravery; nay, by such chanting itself they

divine the success of the approaching fight. For, according to the different din

of the battle, they urge furiously, or shrink timorously. Nor does what they

utter, so much seem to be singing as the voice and exertion of valour. They

chiefly study a tone fierce and harsh, with a broken and unequal murmur, and

therefore  apply  their  shields  to  their  mouths,  whence  the  voice  may  by

rebounding swell with greater fulness and force. Besides there are some of

opinion, that Ulysses, whilst he wandered about in his long and fabulous

voyages, was carried into this ocean and entered Germany, and that by him

Asciburgium  was  founded  and  named,  a  city  at  this  day  standing  and

inhabited  upon  the  bank  of  the  Rhine:  nay,  that  in  the  same  place  was

formerly found an altar dedicated to Ulysses, with the name of his father

Laertes added to his own, and that upon the confines of Germany and Rhoetia

are still extant certain monuments and tombs inscribed with Greek characters.

Traditions these which I mean not either to confirm with arguments of my

own or to refute. Let every one believe or deny the same according to his

own bent.

 
For myself, I concur in opinion with such as suppose the people of Germany

never  to  have  mingled  by  inter-marriages  with  other  nations,  but  to  have

remained  a  people  pure,  and  independent,  and  resembling  none  but

themselves. Hence amongst such a mighty multitude of men, the same make

and form is found in all, eyes stern and blue, yellow hair, huge bodies, but

vigorous only in the first onset. Of pains and labour they are not equally

patient, nor can they at all endure thrift and heat. To bear hunger and cold

they are hardened by their climate and soil.

 
Their  lands,  however  somewhat  different  in  aspect,  yet  taken  all  together

consist of gloomy forests or nasty marshes; lower and moister towards the

confines  of  Gaul,  more  mountainous  and  windy  towards  Noricum  and

Pannonia;  very  apt  to  bear  grain,  but  altogether  unkindly  to  fruit  trees;

abounding in flocks and herds, but generally small of growth. Nor even intheir oxen is found the usual stateliness, no more than the natural ornaments

and grandeur of head. In the number of their herds they rejoice; and these are

their only, these their most desirable riches. Silver and gold the Gods have

denied them, whether in mercy or in wrath, I am unable to determine. Yet I

would  not  venture  to  aver  that  in  Germany  no  vein  of  gold  or  silver  is

produced; for who has ever searched? For the use and possession, it is certain

they care not. Amongst them indeed are to be seen vessels of silver, such as

have been presented to their Princes and Ambassadors, but holden in no other

esteem than vessels made of earth. The Germans however adjoining to our

frontiers value gold and silver for the purposes of commerce, and are wont to

distinguish and prefer certain of our coins. They who live more remote are

more primitive and simple in their dealings, and exchange one commodity for

another. The money which they like is the old and long known, that indented,

[Footnote:  With  milled  edges.]  or  that  impressed  with  a  chariot  and  two

horses. Silver too is what they seek more than gold, from no fondness or

preference, but because small pieces are more ready in purchasing things

cheap and common.

 
Neither in truth do they abound in iron, as from the fashion of their weapons

may be gathered. Swords they rarely use, or the larger spear. They carry

javelins or, in their own language, framms, pointed with a piece of iron short

and narrow, but so sharp and manageable, that with the same weapon they

can  fight  at  a  distance  or  hand  to  hand,  just  as  need  requires.  Nay,  the

horsemen  also  are  content  with  a  shield  and  a  javelin.  The  foot  throw

likewise  weapons  missive,  each  particular  is  armed  with  many,  and  hurls

them  a  mighty  space,  all  naked  or  only  wearing  a  light  cassock.  In  their

equipment they show no ostentation; only that their shields are diversified

and adorned with curious colours. With coats of mail very few are furnished,

and hardly upon any is seen a headpiece or helmet. Their horses are nowise

signal  either  in  fashion  or  in  fleetness;  nor  taught  to  wheel  and  bound,

according to the practice of the Romans: they only move them forward in a

line, or turn them right about, with such compactness and equality that no one

is ever behind the rest. To one who considers the whole it is manifest, that in

their foot their principal strength lies, and therefore they fight intermixed with

the horse: for such is their swiftness as to match and suit with the motions

and  engagements  of  the  cavalry.  So  that  the  infantry  are  elected  from

amongst the most robust of their youth, and placed in front of the army. Thenumber to be sent is also ascertained, out of every village an hundred, and by

this very name they continue to be called at home, those of the hundred band:

thus what was at first no more than a number, becomes thenceforth a title and

distinction  of  honour.  In  arraying  their  army,  they  divide  the  whole  into

distinct battalions formed sharp in front. To recoil in battle, provided you

return again to the attack, passes with them rather for policy than fear. Even

when the combat is no more than doubtful, they bear away the bodies of their

slain. The most glaring disgrace that can befall them, is to have quitted their

shield; nor to one branded with such ignominy is it lawful to join in their

sacrifices, or to enter into their assemblies; and many who had escaped in the

day of battle, have hanged themselves to put an end to this their infamy.

 
In the choice of kings they are determined by the splendour of their race, in

that  of  generals  by  their  bravery.  Neither  is  the  power  of  their  kings

unbounded or arbitrary: and their generals procure obedience not so much by

the force of their authority as by that of their example, when they appear

enterprising  and  brave,  when  they  signalise  themselves  by  courage  and

prowess;  and  if  they  surpass  all  in  admiration  and  pre-eminence,  if  they

surpass all at the head of an army. But to none else but the Priests is it

allowed to exercise correction, or to inflict bonds or stripes. Nor when the

Priests do this, is the same considered as a punishment, or arising from the

orders of the general, but from the immediate command of the Deity, Him

whom they believe to accompany them in war. They therefore carry with

them when going to fight, certain images and figures taken out of their holy

groves. What proves the principal incentive to their valour is, that it is not at

random nor by the fortuitous conflux of men that their troops and pointed

battalions are formed, but by the conjunction of whole families, and tribes of

relations. Moreover, close to the field of battle are lodged all the nearest and

most interesting pledges of nature. Hence they hear the doleful howlings of

their  wives,  hence  the  cries  of  their  tender  infants.  These  are  to  each

particular the witnesses whom he most reverences and dreads; these yield

him the praise which affect him most. Their wounds and maims they carry to

their mothers, or to their wives, neither are their mothers or wives shocked in

telling, or in sucking their bleeding sores. [Footnote: Nec illae numerare aut

exigere plagas pavent.] Nay, to their husbands and sons whilst engaged in

battle, they administer meat and encouragement.

 
In history we find, that some armies already yielding and ready to fly, havebeen  by  the  women  restored,  through  their  inflexible  importunity  and

entreaties, presenting their breasts, and showing their impending captivity; an

evil to the Germans then by far most dreadful when it befalls their women. So

that the spirit of such cities as amongst their hostages are enjoined to send

their  damsels  of  quality,  is  always  engaged  more  effectually  than  that  of

others. They even believe them endowed with something celestial and the

spirit of prophecy. Neither do they disdain to consult them, nor neglect the

responses which they return. In the reign of the deified Vespasian, we have

seen Veleda for a long time, and by many nations, esteemed and adored as a

divinity. In times past they likewise worshipped Aurinia and several more,

from  no  complaisance  or  effort  of  flattery,  nor  as  Deities  of  their  own

creating.

 
Of all the Gods, Mercury is he whom they worship most. To him on certain

stated days it is lawful to offer even human victims. Hercules and Mars they

appease with beasts usually allowed for sacrifice. Some of the Suevians make

likewise  immolations  to  Isis,  Concerning  the  cause  and  original  of  this

foreign sacrifice I have found small light; unless the figure of her image

formed like a galley, show that such devotion arrived from abroad. For the

rest,  from  the  grandeur  and  majesty  of  beings  celestial,  they  judge  it

altogether unsuitable to hold the Gods enclosed within walls, or to represent

them under any human likeness. They consecrate whole woods and groves,

and by the names of the Gods they call these recesses; divinities these, which

only in contemplation and mental reverence they behold.

 
To the use of lots and auguries, they are addicted beyond all other nations.

Their method of divining by lots is exceeding simple. From a tree which

bears fruit they cut a twig, and divide it into two small pieces. These they

distinguish by so many several marks, and throw them at random and without

order upon a white garment. Then the Priest of the community, if for the

public  the  lots  are  consulted,  or  the  father  of  a  family  if  about  a  private

concern,  after  he  has  solemnly  invoked  the  Gods,  with  eyes  lifted  up  to

heaven, takes up every piece thrice, and having done thus forms a judgment

according to the marks before made. If the chances have proved forbidding,

they are no more consulted upon the same affair during the same day: even

when they are inviting, yet, for confirmation, the faith of auguries too is tried.

Yea, here also is the known practice of divining events from the voices and

flight  of  birds.  But  to  this  nation  it  is  peculiar,  to  learn  presages  andadmonitions divine from horses also. These are nourished by the State in the

same sacred woods and groves, all milk-white and employed in no earthly

labour. These yoked in the holy chariot, are accompanied by the Priest and

the King, or the Chief of the community, who both carefully observe his

actions and neighing. Nor in any sort of augury is more faith and assurance

reposed,  not  by  the  populace  only,  but  even  by  the  nobles,  even  by  the

Priests. These account themselves the ministers of the Gods, and the horses

privy to his will. They have likewise another method of divination, whence to

learn the issue of great and mighty wars. From the nation with whom they are

at war they contrive, it avails not how, to gain a captive: him they engage in

combat with one selected from amongst themselves, each armed after the

manner of his country, and according as the victory falls to this or to the

other, gather a presage of the whole.

 
Affairs  of  smaller  moment  the  chiefs  determine:  about  matters  of  higher

consequence  the  whole  nation  deliberates;  yet  in  such  sort,  that  whatever

depends  upon  the  pleasure  and  decision  of  the  people,  is  examined  and

discussed by the chiefs. Where no accident or emergency intervenes, they

assemble upon stated days, either when the moon changes, or is full: since

they  believe  such  seasons  to  be  the  most  fortunate  for  beginning  all

transactions. Neither in reckoning of time do they count, like us, the number

of days but that of nights. In this style their ordinances are framed, in this

style their diets appointed; and with them the night seems to lead and govern

the day. From their extensive liberty this evil and default flows, that they

meet not at once, nor as men commanded and afraid to disobey; so that often

the second day, nay often the third, is consumed through the slowness of the

members in assembling. They sit down as they list, promiscuously, like a

crowd, and all armed. It is by the Priests that silence is enjoined, and with the

power of correction the Priests are then invested. Then the King or Chief is

heard, as are others, each according to his precedence in age, or in nobility, or

in  warlike  renown,  or  in  eloquence;  and  the  influence  of  every  speaker

proceeds  rather  from  his  ability  to  persuade  than  from  any  authority  to

command.  If  the  proposition  displease,  they  reject  it  by  an  inarticulate

murmur: if it be pleasing, they brandish their javelins. The most honourable

manner of signifying their assent, is to express their applause by the sound of

their arms.

 
In the assembly it is allowed to present accusations, and to prosecute capitaloffences. Punishments vary according to the quality of the crime. Traitors and

deserters  they  hang  upon  trees.  Cowards,  and  sluggards,  and  unnatural

prostitutes they smother in mud and bogs under an heap of hurdles. Such

diversity  in  their  executions  has  this  view,  that  in  punishing  of  glaring

iniquities, it behoves likewise to display them to sight: but effeminacy and

pollution  must  be  buried  and  concealed.  In  lighter  transgressions  too  the

penalty is measured by the fault, and the delinquents upon conviction are

condemned to pay a certain number of horses or cattle. Part of this mulct

accrues  to  the  King  or  to  the  community,  part  to  him  whose  wrongs  are

vindicated, or to his next kindred. In the same assemblies are also chosen

their  chiefs  or  rulers,  such  as  administer  justice  in  their  villages  and

boroughs. To each of these are assigned an hundred persons chosen from

amongst the populace, to accompany and assist him, men who help him at

once with their authority and their counsel.

 
Without  being  armed  they  transact  nothing,  whether  of  public  or  private

concernment. But it is repugnant to their custom for any man to use arms,

before the community has attested his capacity to wield them. Upon such

testimonial, either one of the rulers, or his father, or some kinsman dignify

the young man in the midst of the assembly, with a shield and javelin. This

amongst them is the manly robe, this the first degree of honour conferred

upon their youth. Before this they seem no more than part of a private family,

but thenceforward part of the Commonweal. The princely dignity they confer

even upon striplings, whose race is eminently noble, or whose fathers have

done great and signal services to the State. For about the rest, who are more

vigorous and long since tried, they crowd to attend: nor is it any shame to be

seen  amongst  the  followers  of  these.  Nay,  there  are  likewise  degrees  of

followers, higher or lower, just as he whom they follow judges fit. Mighty

too is the emulation amongst these followers, of each to be first in favour

with his Prince; mighty also the emulation of the Princes, to excel in the

number and valour of followers. This is their principal state, this their chief

force, to be at all times surrounded with a huge band of chosen young men,

for ornament and glory in peace, for security and defence in war. Nor is it

amongst his own people only, but even from the neighbouring communities,

that any of their Princes reaps so much renown and a name so great, when he

surpasses  in  the  number  and  magnanimity  of  his  followers.  For  such  are

courted by Embassies, and distinguished with presents, and by the terror oftheir fame alone often dissipate wars.

 
In the day of battle, it is scandalous to the Prince to be surpassed in feats of

bravery, scandalous to his followers to fail in matching the bravery of the

Prince. But it is infamy during life, and indelible reproach, to return alive

from a battle where their Prince was slain. To preserve their Prince, to defend

him, and to ascribe to his glory all their own valorous deeds, is the sum and

most sacred part of their oath. The Princes fight for victory; for the Prince his

followers  fight.  Many  of  the  young  nobility,  when  their  own  community

comes  to  languish  in  its  vigour  by  long  peace  and  inactivity,  betake

themselves through impatience to other States which then prove to be in war.

For, besides that this people cannot brook repose, besides that by perilous

adventures they more quickly blazon their fame, they cannot otherwise than

by  violence  and  war  support  their  huge  train  of  retainers.  For  from  the

liberality of their Prince, they demand and enjoy that war-horse of theirs, with

that victorious javelin dyed in the blood of their enemies. In the place of pay,

they are supplied with a daily table and repasts; though grossly prepared, yet

very  profuse.  For  maintaining  such  liberality  and  munificence,  a  fund  is

furnished by continual wars and plunder. Nor could you so easily persuade

them to cultivate the ground, or to await the return of the seasons and produce

of the year, as to provoke the foe and to risk wounds and death: since stupid

and spiritless they account it, to acquire by their sweat what they can gain by

their blood.

 
Upon any recess from war, they do not much attend the chase. Much more of

their time they pass in indolence, resigned to sleep and repasts. [Footnote:

"Dediti somno, ciboque:" handed over to sloth and gluttony.] All the most

brave, all the most warlike, apply to nothing at all; but to their wives, to the

ancient men, and to every the most impotent domestic, trust all the care of

their  house,  and  of  their  lands  and  possessions.  They  themselves  loiter.

[Footnote: Are rude and lazy.] Such is the amazing diversity of their nature,

that in the same men is found so much delight in sloth, with so much enmity

to tranquillity and repose. The communities are wont, of their own accord

and man by man, to bestow upon their Princes a certain number of beasts, or

a certain portion of grain; a contribution which passes indeed for a mark of

reverence and honour, but serves also to supply their necessities. They chiefly

rejoice in the gifts which come from the bordering countries, such as are sent

not only by particulars but in the name of the State; curious horses, splendidarmour,  rich  harness,  with  collars  of  silver  and  gold.  Now  too  they  have

learnt, what we have taught them, to receive money.

 
That  none  of  the  several  people  in  Germany  live  together  in  cities,  is

abundantly  known;  nay,  that  amongst  them  none  of  their  dwellings  are

suffered to be contiguous. They inhabit apart and distinct, just as a fountain,

or  a  field,  or  a  wood  happened  to  invite  them  to  settle.  They  raise  their

villages in opposite rows, but not in our manner with the houses joined one to

another. Every man has a vacant space quite round his own, whether for

security against accidents from fire, or that they want the art of building.

With them in truth, is unknown even the use of mortar and of tiles. In all their

structures they employ materials quite gross and unhewn, void of fashion and

comeliness. Some parts they besmear with an earth so pure and resplendent,

that it resembles painting and colours. They are likewise wont to scoop caves

deep in the ground, and over them to lay great heaps of dung. Thither they

retire for shelter in the winter, and thither convey their grain: for by such

close places they mollify the rigorous and excessive cold. Besides when at

any time their enemy invades them, he can only ravage the open country, but

either knows not such recesses as are invisible and subterraneous; or must

suffer them to escape him, on this very account that he is uncertain where to

find them.

 
For their covering a mantle is what they all wear, fastened with a clasp or, for

want of it, with a thorn. As far as this reaches not they are naked, and lie

whole days before the fire. The most wealthy are distinguished with a vest,

not one large and flowing like those of Sarmatians and Parthians, but girt

close about them and expressing the proportion of every limb. They likewise

wear  the  skins  of  savage  beasts,  a  dress  which  those  bordering  upon  the

Rhine use without any fondness or delicacy, but about which such who live

further in the country are more curious, as void of all apparel introduced by

commerce.  They  choose  certain  wild  beasts,  and,  having  flayed  them,

diversify their hides with many spots, as also with the skins of monsters from

the deep, such as are engendered in the distant ocean and in seas unknown.

Neither does the dress of the women differ from that of the men, save that the

women  are  orderly  attired  in  linen  embroidered  with  purple,  and  use  no

sleeves, so that all their arms are bare. The upper part of their breast is withal

exposed. Yet the laws of matrimony are severely observed there; nor in the

whole of their manners is ought more praiseworthy than this: for they arealmost the only Barbarians contented with one wife, excepting a very few

amongst them; men of dignity who marry divers wives, from no wantonness

or lubricity, but courted for the lustre of their family into many alliances.

 
To the husband, the wife tenders no dowry; but the husband, to the wife. The

parents and relations attend and declare their approbation of the presents, not

presents adapted to feminine pomp and delicacy, nor such as serve to deck

the new married woman; but oxen and horse accoutred, and a shield, with a

javelin and sword. By virtue of these gifts, she is espoused. She too on her

part brings her husband some arms. This they esteem the highest tie, these the

holy mysteries, and matrimonial Gods. That the woman may not suppose

herself free from the considerations of fortitude and fighting, or exempt from

the casualties of war, the very first solemnities of her wedding serve to warn

her, that she comes to her husband as a partner in his hazards and fatigues,

that she is to suffer alike with him, to adventure alike, during peace or during

war. This the oxen joined in the same yoke plainly indicate, this the horse

ready equipped, this the present of arms. 'Tis thus she must be content to live,

thus  to  resign  life.  The  arms  which  she  then  receives  she  must  preserve

inviolate, and to her sons restore the same, as presents worthy of them, such

as their wives may again receive, and still resign to her grandchildren.

 
They  therefore  live  in  a  state  of  chastity  well  secured;  corrupted  by  no

seducing shows and public diversions, by no irritations from banqueting. Of

learning and of any secret intercourse by letters, they are all equally ignorant,

men and women. Amongst a people so numerous, adultery is exceeding rare;

a crime instantly punished, and the punishment left to be inflicted by the

husband. He, having cut off her hair, expells her from his house naked, in

presence of her kindred, and pursues her with stripes throughout the village.

For, to a woman who has prostituted her person, no pardon is ever granted.

However beautiful she be, however young, however abounding in wealth, a

husband she can never find. In truth, nobody turns vices into mirth there, nor

is the practice of corrupting and of yielding to corruption, called the custom

of  the  Age.  Better  still  do  those  communities,  in  which  none  but  virgins

marry, and where to a single marriage all their views and inclinations are at

once confined. Thus, as they have but one body and one life, they take but

one husband, that beyond him they may have no thought, no further wishes,

nor love him only as their husband but as their marriage. [Footnote: "Sed

tamquam matrimonium ament."] To restrain generation and the increase ofchildren, is esteemed an abominable sin, as also to kill infants newly born.

And more powerful with them are good manners, than with other people are

good laws.

 
In all their houses the children are reared naked and nasty; and thus grow into

those  limbs,  into  that  bulk,  which  with  marvel  we  behold.  They  are  all

nourished  with  the  milk  of  their  own  mothers,  and  never  surrendered  to

handmaids and nurses. The lord you cannot discern from the slave, by any

superior delicacy in rearing. Amongst the same cattle they promiscuously

live, upon the same ground they without distinction lie, till at a proper age the

free-born  are  parted  from  the  rest,  and  their  bravery  recommend  them  to

notice. Slow and late do the young men come to the use of women, and thus

very long preserve the vigour of youth. Neither are the virgins hastened to

wed. They must both have the same sprightly youth, the like stature, and

marry  when  equal  and  able-bodied.  Thus  the  robustness  of  the  parents  is

inherited by the children. Children are holden in the same estimation with

their mother's brother, as with their father. Some hold this tie of blood to be

most inviolable and binding, and in receiving of hostages, such pledges are

most considered and claimed, as they who at once possess affections the most

unalienable,  and  the  most  diffuse  interest  in  their  family.  To  every  man,

however, his own children are heirs and successors: wills they make none: for

want of children his next akin inherits; his own brothers, those of his father,

or those of his mother. To ancient men, the more they abound in descendants,

in relations and affinities, so much the more favour and reverence accrues.

From being childless, no advantage nor estimation is derived.

 
All the enmities of your house, whether of your father or of your kindred, you

must  necessarily  adopt;  as  well  as  all  their  friendships.  Neither  are  such

enmities unappeasable and permanent: since even for so great a crime as

homicide, compensation is made by a fixed number of sheep and cattle, and

by it the whole family is pacified to content. A temper this, wholesome to the

State;  because  to  a  free  nation,  animosities  and  faction  are  always  more

menacing and perilous. In social feasts, and deeds of hospitality, no nation

upon earth was ever more liberal and abounding. To refuse admitting under

your  roof  any  man  whatsoever,  is  held  wicked  and  inhuman.  Every  man

receives every comer, and treats him with repasts as large as his ability can

possibly furnish. When the whole stock is consumed, he who had treated so

hospitably guides and accompanies his guest to a new scene of hospitality;and  both  proceed  to  the  next  house,  though  neither  of  them  invited.  Nor

avails it, that they were not: they are there received, with the same frankness

and humanity. Between a stranger and an acquaintance, in dispensing the

rules and benefits of hospitality, no difference is made. Upon your departure,

if you ask anything, it is the custom to grant it; and with the same facility,

they ask of you. In gifts they delight, but neither claim merit from what they

give,  nor  own  any  obligation  for  what  they  receive.  Their  manner  of

entertaining their guests is familiar and kind.

 
The moment they rise from sleep, which they generally prolong till late in the

day, they bathe, most frequently in warm water; as in a country where the

winter is very long and severe. From bathing, they sit down to meat; every

man apart, upon a particular seat, and at a separate table. They then proceed

to their affairs, all in arms; as in arms, they no less frequently go to banquet.

To continue drinking night and day without intermission, is a reproach to no

man. Frequent then are their broils, as usual amongst men intoxicated with

liquor; and such broils rarely terminate in angry words, but for the most part

in  maimings  and  slaughter.  Moreover  in  these  their  feasts,  they  generally

deliberate  about  reconciling  parties  at  enmity,  about  forming  affinities,

choosing of Princes, and finally about peace and war. For they judge, that at

no season is the soul more open to thoughts that are artless and upright, or

more fired with such as are great and bold. This people, of themselves nowise

subtile or politic, from the freedom of the place and occasion acquire still

more frankness to disclose the most secret motions and purposes of their

hearts.  When  therefore  the  minds  of  all  have  been  once  laid  open  and

declared,  on  the  day  following  the  several  sentiments  are  revised  and

canvassed; and to both conjectures of time, due regard is had. They consult,

when they know not how to dissemble; they determine, when they cannot

mistake.

 
For their drink, they draw a liquor from barley or other grain; and ferment the

same, so as to make it resemble wine. Nay, they who dwell upon the bank of

the Rhine deal in wine. Their food is very simple; wild fruit, fresh venison, or

coagulated  milk.  They  banish  hunger  without  formality,  without  curious

dressing  and  curious  fare.  In  extinguishing  thirst,  they  use  not  equal

temperance. If you will but humour their excess in drinking, and supply them

with as much as they covet, it will be no less easy to vanquish them by vices

than by arms. 
Of public diversions they have but one sort, and in all their meetings the same

is still exhibited. Young men, such, as make it their pastime, fling themselves

naked and dance amongst sharp swords and the deadly points of javelins.

From habit they acquire their skill, and from their skill a graceful manner; yet

from  hence  draw  no  gain  or  hire:  though  this  adventurous  gaiety  has  its

reward, namely, that of pleasing the spectators. What is marvellous, playing

at dice is one of their most serious employments; and even sober, they are

gamesters: nay, so desperately do they venture upon the chance of winning or

losing,  that  when  their  whole  substance  is  played  away,  they  stake  their

liberty and their persons upon one and the last throw. The loser goes calmly

into  voluntary  bondage.  However  younger  he  be,  however  stronger,  he

tamely suffers himself to be bound and sold by the winner. Such is their

perseverance in an evil course: they themselves call it honour.

 
Slaves of this class, they exchange away in commerce, to free themselves too

from the shame of such a victory. Of their other slaves they make not such

use as we do of ours, by distributing amongst them the several offices and

employments of the family. Each of them has a dwelling of his own, each a

household to govern. His lord uses him like a tenant, and obliges him to pay a

quantity of grain, or of cattle, or of cloth. Thus far only the subserviency of

the slave extends. All the other duties in a family, not the slaves, but the

wives and children discharge. To inflict stripes upon a slave, or to put him in

chains, or to doom him to severe labour, are things rarely seen. To kill them

they sometimes are wont, not through correction or government, but in heat

and rage, as they would an enemy, save that no vengeance or penalty follows.

The  freedmen  very  little  surpass  the  slaves,  rarely  are  of  moment  in  the

house; in the community never, excepting only such nations where arbitrary

dominion prevails. For there they bear higher sway than the free-born, nay,

higher than the nobles. In other countries the inferior condition of freedmen is

a proof of public liberty.

 
To  the  practice  of  usury  and  of  increasing  money  by  interest,  they  are

strangers;  and  hence  is  found  a  better  guard  against  it,  than  if  it  were

forbidden. They shift from land to land; and, still appropriating a portion

suitable to the number of hands for manuring, anon parcel out the whole

amongst particulars according to the condition and quality of each. As the

plains are very spacious, the allotments are easily assigned. Every year theychange, and cultivate a fresh soil; yet still there is ground to spare. For they

strive not to bestow labour proportionable to the fertility and compass of their

lands,  by  planting  orchards,  by  enclosing  meadows,  by  watering  gardens.

From the earth, corn only is exacted. Hence they quarter not the year into so

many seasons. Winter, Spring, and Summer, they understand; and for each

have proper appellations. Of the name and blessings of Autumn, they are

equally ignorant.

 
In performing their funerals, they show no state or vainglory. This only is

carefully observed, that with the corpses of their signal men certain woods be

burned. Upon the funeral pile they accumulate neither apparel nor perfumes.

Into the fire, are always thrown the arms of the dead, and sometimes his

horse. With sods of earth only the sepulchre is raised. The pomp of tedious

and elaborate monuments they contemn, as things grievous to the deceased.

Tears  and  wailings  they  soon  dismiss:  their  affliction  and  woe  they  long

retain. In women, it is reckoned becoming to bewail their loss; in men, to

remember it. This is what in general we have learned, in the original and

customs of the whole people of Germany. I shall now deduce the institutions

and usages of the several people, as far as they vary one from another; as also

an  account  of  what  nations  from  thence  removed,  to  settle  themselves  in

Gaul.

 
That the Gauls were in times past more puissant and formidable, is related by

the Prince of authors, the deified Julius; [Footnote: Julius Caesar.] and hence

it  is  probable  that  they  too  have  passed  into  Germany.  For  what  a  small

obstacle must be a river, to restrain any nation, as each grew more potent,

from  seizing  or  changing  habitations;  when  as  yet  all  habitations  were

common,  and  not  parted  or  appropriated  by  the  founding  and  terror  of

Monarchies?  The  region  therefore  between  the  Hercynian  Forest  and  the

rivers Moenus [Footnote: Main.] and Rhine, was occupied by the Helvetians;

as was that beyond it by the Boians, both nations of Gaul. There still remains

a place called Boiemum, which denotes the primitive name and antiquity of

the country, although the inhabitants have been changed. But whether the

Araviscans are derived from the Osians, a nation of Germans passing into

Pannonia,  or  the  Osians  from  the  Araviscans  removing  from  thence  into

Germany, is a matter undecided; since they both still use the language, the

same customs and the same laws. For, as of old they lived alike poor and

alike free, equal proved the evils and advantages on each side the river, andcommon to both people. The Treverians and Nervians aspire passionately to

the reputation of being descended from the Germans; since by the glory of

this original, they would escape all imputation of resembling the Gauls in

person  and  effeminacy.  Such  as  dwell  upon  the  bank  of  the  Rhine,  the

Vangiones, the Tribocians, and the Nemetes, are without doubt all Germans.

The  Ubians  are  ashamed  of  their  original;  though  they  have  a  particular

honour to boast, that of having merited an establishment as a Roman Colony,

and still delight to be called Agrippinensians, after the name of their founder:

they indeed formerly came from beyond the Rhine, and, for the many proofs

of their fidelity, were settled upon the very bank of the river; not to be there

confined  or  guarded  themselves,  but  to  guard  and  defend  that  boundary

against the rest of the Germans.

 
Of  all  these  nations,  the  Batavians  are  the  most  signal  in  bravery.  They

inhabit not much territory upon the Rhine, but possess an island in it. They

were formerly part of the Cattans, and by means of feuds at home removed to

these dwellings; whence they might become a portion of the Roman Empire.

With them this honour still remains, as also the memorials of their ancient

association with us: for they are not under the contempt of paying tribute, nor

subject  to  be  squeezed  by  the  farmers  of  the  revenue.  Free  from  all

impositions and payments, and only set apart for the purposes of fighting,

they are reserved wholly for the wars, in the same manner as a magazine of

weapons and armour. Under the same degree of homage are the nation of the

Mattiacians. For such is the might and greatness of the Roman People, as to

have carried the awe and esteem of their Empire beyond the Rhine and the

ancient boundaries. Thus the Mattiacians, living upon the opposite banks,

enjoy a settlement and limits of their own; yet in spirit and inclination are

attached to us: in other things resembling the Batavians, save that as they still

breathe their original air, still possess their primitive soil, they are thence

inspired with superior vigour and keenness. Amongst the people of Germany

I would not reckon those who occupy the lands which are under decimation,

though they be such as dwell beyond the Rhine and the Danube. By several

worthless and vagabond Gauls, and such as poverty rendered daring, that

region was seized as one belonging to no certain possessor: afterwards it

became a skirt of the Empire and part of a province, upon the enlargement of

our bounds and the extending of our garrisons and frontier.

 
Beyond these are the Cattans, whose territories begin at the Hercynian Forest,and  consist  not  of  such  wide  and  marshy  plains,  as  those  of  the  other

communities contained within the vast compass of Germany; but produce

ranges of hills, such as run lofty and contiguous for a long tract, then by

degrees sink and decay. Moreover the Hercynian Forest attends for a while its

native Cattans, then suddenly forsakes them. This people are distinguished

with bodies more hardy and robust, compact limbs, stern countenances, and

greater  vigour  of  spirit.  For  Germans,  they  are  men  of  much  sense  and

address.  [Footnote:  "Leur  intelligence  et  leur  finesse  étonnent,  dans  des

Germains."] They dignify chosen men, listen to such as are set over them,

know how to preserve their post, to discern occasions, to rebate their own

ardour and impatience; how to employ the day, how to entrench themselves

by night. They account fortune amongst things slippery and uncertain, but

bravery amongst such as are never- failing and secure; and, what is exceeding

rare nor ever to be learnt but by a wholesome course of discipline, in the

conduct of the general they repose more assurance than in the strength of the

army.  Their  whole  forces  consist  of  foot,  who  besides  their  arms  carry

likewise  instruments  of  iron  and  their  provisions.  You  may  see  other

Germans proceed equipped to battle, but the Cattans so as to conduct a war.

[Footnote: "Alios ad proelium ire videas, Chattos ad bellum."] They rarely

venture  upon  excursions  or  casual  encounters.  It  is  in  truth  peculiar  to

cavalry, suddenly to conquer, or suddenly to fly. Such haste and velocity

rather resembles fear. Patience and deliberation are more akin to intrepidity.

 
Moreover a custom, practised indeed in other nations of Germany, yet very

rarely and confined only to particulars more daring than the rest, prevails

amongst the Cattans by universal consent. As soon as they arrive to maturity

of years, they let their hair and beards continue to grow, nor till they have

slain  an  enemy  do  they  ever  lay  aside  this  form  of  countenance  by  vow

sacred to valour. Over the blood and spoil of a foe they make bare their face.

They allege, that they have now acquitted themselves of the debt and duty

contracted by their birth, and rendered themselves worthy of their country,

worthy of their parents. Upon the spiritless, cowardly and unwarlike, such

deformity of visage still remains. [Footnote: "Manet squalor."] All the most

brave  likewise  wear  an  iron  ring  (a  mark  of  great  dishonour  this  in  that

nation) and retain it as a chain; till by killing an enemy they become released.

Many of the Cattans delight always to bear this terrible aspect; and, when

grown white through age, become awful and conspicuous by such marks,both to the enemy and their own countrymen. By them in all engagements the

first assault is made: of them the front of the battle is always composed, as

men who in their looks are singular and tremendous. For even during peace

they abate nothing in the grimness and horror of their countenance. They

have no house to inhabit, no land to cultivate, nor any domestic charge or

care. With whomsoever they come to sojourn, by him they are maintained;

always very prodigal of the substance of others, always despising what is

their own, till the feebleness of old age overtakes them, and renders them

unequal to the efforts of such rigid bravery.

 
Next to the Cattans, dwell the Usipians and Tencterians; upon the Rhine now

running in a channel uniform and certain, such as suffices for a boundary.

The Tencterians, besides their wonted glory in war, surpass in the service and

discipline of their cavalry. Nor do the Cattans derive higher applause from

their  foot,  than  the  Tencterians  from  their  horse.  Such  was  the  order

established by their forefathers, and what their posterity still pursue. From

riding and exercising of horses, their children borrow their pastimes; in this

exercise the young men find matter for emulating one another, and in this the

old men take pleasure to persevere. Horses are by the father bequeathed as

part of his household and family, horses are conveyed amongst the rights of

succession, and as such the son receives them; but not the eldest son, like

other effects, by priority of birth, but he who happens to be signal in boldness

and superior in war.

 
Contiguous to the Tencterians formerly dwelt the Bructerians, in whose room

it  is  said  the  Chamavians  and  Angrivarians  are  now  settled;  they  who

expulsed and almost extirpated the Bructerians, with the concurrence of the

neighbouring nations: whether in detestation of their arrogance, or allured by

the  love  of  spoil,  or  through  the  special  favour  of  the  Gods  towards  us

Romans. They in truth even vouchsafed to gratify us with the sight of the

battle. In it there fell above sixty thousand souls, without a blow struck by the

Romans; but, what is a circumstance still more glorious, fell to furnish them

with a spectacle of joy and recreation. May the Gods continue and perpetuate

amongst these nations, if not any love for us, yet by all means this their

animosity and hate towards each other: since whilst the destiny of the Empire

thus urges it, fortune cannot more signally befriend us, than in sowing strife

amongst our foes.

 The Angrivarians and Chamavians are enclosed behind, by the Dulgibinians

and Chasuarians; and by other nations not so much noted: before, the Frisians

face them. The country of Frisia is divided into two; called the greater and

lesser, according to the measure of their strength. Both nations stretch along

the Rhine, quite to the ocean; and surround vast lakes such as once have

borne Roman fleets. We have moreover even ventured out from thence into

the  ocean,  and  upon  its  coasts  common  fame  has  reported  the  pillars  of

Hercules to be still standing: whether it be that Hercules ever visited these

parts, or that to his renowned name we are wont to ascribe whatever is grand

and glorious everywhere. Neither did Drusus who made the attempt, want

boldness to pursue it: but the roughness of the ocean withstood him, nor

would  suffer  discoveries  to  be  made  about  itself,  no  more  than  about

Hercules. Thenceforward the enterprise was dropped: nay, more pious and

reverential it seemed, to believe the marvellous feats of the Gods than to

know and to prove them. [Footnote: "Coelum ipsum petimus stultitia."]

 
Hitherto,  I  have  been  describing  Germany  towards  the  west.  To  the

northward, it winds away with an immense compass. And first of all occurs

the  nation  of  the  Chaucians:  who  though  they  begin  immediately  at  the

confines of the Frisians, and occupy part of the shore, extend so far as to

border upon all the several people whom I have already recounted; till at last,

by a circuit, they reach quite to the boundaries of the Cattans. A region so

vast, the Chaucians do not only possess but fill; a people of all the Germans

the most noble, such as would rather maintain their grandeur by justice than

violence. They live in repose, retired from broils abroad, void of avidity to

possess more, free from a spirit of domineering over others. They provoke no

wars, they ravage no countries, they pursue no plunder. Of their bravery and

power,  the  chief  evidence  arises  from  hence,  that,  without  wronging  or

oppressing others, they are come to be superior to all. Yet they are all ready

to arm, and if an exigency require, armies are presently raised, powerful and

abounding as they are in men and horses; and even when they are quiet and

their weapons laid aside, their credit and name continue equally high.

 
Along the side of the Chaucians and Cattans dwell the Cheruscans; a people

who finding no enemy to rouse them, were enfeebled by a peace overlasting

and uniform, but such as they failed not to nourish. A conduct which proved

more pleasing than secure; since treacherous is that repose which you enjoy

amongst  neighbours  that  are  very  powerful  and  very  fond  of  rule  andmastership.  When  recourse  is  once  had  to  the  sword,  modesty  and  fair

dealing will be vainly pleaded by the weaker; names these which are always

assumed by the stronger. Thus the Cheruscans, they who formerly bore the

character of good and upright, are now called cowards and fools; and the

fortune of the Cattans who subdued them, grew immediately to be wisdom.

In  the  ruin  of  the  Cheruscans,  the  Fosians,  also  their  neighbours,  were

involved;  and  in  their  calamities  bore  an  equal  share,  though  in  their

prosperity they had been weaker and less considered.

 
In the same winding tract of Germany live the Cimbrians, close to the ocean;

a community now very small, but great in fame. Nay, of their ancient renown,

many and extensive are the traces and monuments still remaining; even their

entrenchments upon either shore, so vast in compass that from thence you

may even now measure the greatness and numerous bands of that people, and

assent to the account of an army so mighty. It was on the six hundred and

fortieth year of Rome, when of the arms of the Cimbrians the first mention

was made, during the Consulship of Caecilius Metellus and Papirius Carbo. If

from that time we count to the second Consulship of the Emperor Trajan, the

interval comprehends near two hundred and ten years; so long have we been

conquering Germany. In a course of time, so vast between these two periods,

many  have  been  the  blows  and  disasters  suffered  on  each  side.  In  truth

neither from the Samnites, nor from the Carthaginians, nor from both Spains,

nor from all the nations of Gaul, have we received more frequent checks and

alarms; nor even from the Parthians: for, more vigorous and invincible is the

liberty of the Germans than the monarchy of the Arsacides. Indeed, what has

the power of the East to allege to our dishonour; but the fall of Crassus, that

power which was itself overthrown and abased by Ventidius, with the loss of

the great King Pacorus bereft of his life? But by the Germans the Roman

People have been bereft of five armies, all commanded by Consuls; by the

Germans, the commanders of these armies, Carbo, and Cassius, and Scaurus

Aurelius, and Servilius Caepio, as also Marcus Manlius, were all routed or

taken: by the Germans even the Emperor Augustus was bereft of Varus and

three legions. Nor without difficulty and loss of men were they defeated by

Caius  Marius  in  Italy,  or  by  the  deified  Julius  in  Gaul,  or  by  Drusus  or

Tiberius  or  Germanicus  in  their  native  territories.  Soon  after,  the  mighty

menaces  of  Caligula  against  them  ended  in  mockery  and  derision.

Thenceforward they continued quiet, till taking advantage of our domesticdivision and civil wars, they stormed and seized the winter entrenchments of

the legions, and aimed at the dominion of Gaul; from whence they were once

more expulsed, and in the times preceding the present, we gained a triumph

over them rather than a victory.

 
I must now proceed to speak of the Suevians, who are not, like the Cattans

and Tencterians, comprehended in a single people; but divided into several

nations  all  bearing  distinct  names,  though,  in  general  they  are  entitled

Suevians,  and  occupy  the  larger  share  of  Germany.  This  people  are

remarkable for a peculiar custom, that of twisting their hair and binding it up

in a knot. It is thus the Suevians are distinguished from the other Germans,

thus  the  free  Suevians  from  their  slaves.  In  other  nations,  whether  from

alliance  of  blood  with  the  Suevians,  or,  as  is  usual,  from  imitation,  this

practice is also found, yet rarely, and never exceeds the years of youth. The

Suevians,  even  when  their  hair  is  white  through  age,  continue  to  raise  it

backwards in a manner stern and staring; and often tie it upon the top of their

head only. That of their Princes, is more accurately disposed, and so far they

study to appear agreeable and comely; but without any culpable intention.

For by it, they mean not to make love or to incite it: they thus dress when

proceeding to war, and deck their heads so as to add to their height and terror

in the eyes of the enemy.

 
Of all the Suevians, the Semnones recount themselves to be the most ancient

and  most  noble.  The  belief  of  their  antiquity  is  confirmed  by  religious

mysteries. At a stated time of the year, all the several people descended from

the same stock, assemble by their deputies in a wood; consecrated by the

idolatries of their forefathers, and by superstitious awe in times of old. There

by  publicly  sacrificing  a  man,  they  begin  the  horrible  solemnity  of  their

barbarous worship. To this grove another sort of reverence is also paid. No

one  enters  it  otherwise  than  bound  with  ligatures,  thence  professing  his

subordination  and  meanness,  and  the  power  of  the  Deity  there.  If  he  fall

down, he is not permitted to rise or be raised, but grovels along upon the

ground. And of all their superstition, this is the drift and tendency; that from

this place the nation drew their original, that here God, the supreme Governor

of the world, resides, and that all things else whatsoever are subject to him

and bound to obey him. The potent condition of the Semnones has increased

their influence and authority, as they inhabit an hundred towns; and from the

largeness of their community it comes, that they hold themselves for the headof the Suevians.

 
What  on  the  contrary  ennobles  the  Langobards  is  the  smallness  of  their

number, for that they, who are surrounded with very many and very powerful

nations, derive their security from no obsequiousness or plying; but from the

dint of battle and adventurous deeds. There follow in order the Reudignians,

and Aviones, and Angles, and Varinians, and Eudoses, and Suardones and

Nuithones; all defended by rivers or forests. Nor in one of these nations does

aught remarkable occur, only that they universally join in the worship of

Herthum; that is to say, the Mother Earth. Her they believe to interpose in the

affairs of men, and to visit countries. In an island of the ocean stands the

wood Castum; in it is a chariot dedicated to the Goddess, covered over with a

curtain, and permitted to be touched by none but the Priest. Whenever the

Goddess enters this her holy vehicle, he perceives her; and with profound

veneration attends the motion of the chariot, which is always drawn by yoked

cows.  Then  it  is  that  days  of  rejoicing  always  ensue,  and  in  all  places

whatsoever  which  she  descends  to  honour  with  a  visit  and  her  company,

feasts and recreation abound. They go not to war; they touch no arms; fast

laid up is every hostile weapon; peace and repose are then only known, then

only beloved, till to the temple the same priest reconducts the Goddess when

well tired with the conversation of mortal beings. Anon the chariot is washed

and purified in a secret lake, as also the curtains; nay, the Deity herself too, if

you choose to believe it. In this office it is slaves who minister, and they are

forthwith doomed to be swallowed up in the same lake. Hence all men are

possessed with mysterious terror; as well as with a holy ignorance what that

must be, which none see but such as are immediately to perish. Moreover this

quarter of the Suevians stretches to the middle of Germany.

 
The community next adjoining, is that of the Hermondurians; (that I may now

follow the course of the Danube, as a little before I did that of the Rhine) a

people this, faithful to the Romans. So that to them alone of all the Germans,

commerce is permitted; not barely upon the bank of the Rhine, but more

extensively, and even in that glorious colony in the province of Rhoetia. They

travel everywhere at their own discretion and without a guard; and when to

other nations, we show no more than our arms and encampments, to this

people we throw open our houses and dwellings, as to men who have no

longing to possess them. In the territories of the Hermondurians rises the

Elbe, a river very famous and formerly well known to us; at present we onlyhear it named.

 
Close  by  the  Hermondurians  reside  the  Nariscans,  and  next  to  them  the

Marcomanians  and  Quadians.  Amongst  these  the  Marcomanians  are  most

signal in force and renown; nay, their habitation itself they acquired by their

bravery,  as  from  thence  they  formerly  expulsed  the  Boians.  Nor  do  the

Nariscans or Quadians degenerate in spirit. Now this is as it were the frontier

of Germany, as far as Germany is washed by the Danube. To the times within

our memory the Marcomanians and Quadians were governed by kings, who

were natives of their own, descended from the noble line of Maroboduus and

Tudrus. At present they are even subject to such as are foreigners. But the

whole strength and sway of their kings is derived from the authority of the

Romans. From our arms, they rarely receive any aid; from our money very

frequently.

 
Nor  less  powerful  are  the  several  people  beyond  them;  namely,  the

Marsignians,  the  Gothinians,  the  Osians  and  the  Burians,  who  altogether

enclose the Marcomanians and Quadians behind. Of those, the Marsignians

and the Burians in speech and dress resemble the Suevians. From the Gallic

language spoken by the Gothinians, and from that of Pannonia by the Osians,

it is manifest that neither of these people are Germans; as it is also from their

bearing to pay tribute. Upon them as upon aliens their tribute is imposed,

partly by the Sarmatians, partly by the Quadians. The Gothinians, to heighten

their disgrace, are forced to labour in the iron mines. By all these several

nations but little level country is possessed: they are seated amongst forests,

and upon the ridges and declivities of mountains. For, Suevia is parted by a

continual ridge of mountains; beyond which, live many distinct nations. Of

these the Lygians are most numerous and extensive, and spread into several

communities. It will suffice to mention the most puissant; even the Arians,

Helvicones,  Manimians;  Elysians  and  Naharvalians.  Amongst  the

Naharvalians is shown a grove, sacred to devotion extremely ancient. Over it

a Priest presides apparelled like a woman; but according to the explication of

the Romans, 'tis Castor and Pollux who are here worshipped. This Divinity is

named Alcis. There are indeed no images here, no traces of an extraneous

superstition: yet their devotion is addressed to young men and to brothers.

Now  the  Aryans,  besides  their  forces,  in  which  they  surpass  the  several

nations  just  recounted,  are  in  their  persons  stern  and  truculent;  and  even

humour  and  improve  their  natural  grimness  and  ferocity  by  art  and  time.They wear black shields, their bodies are painted black, they choose dark

nights for engaging in battle; and by the very awe and ghastly hue of their

army,  strike  the  enemy  with  dread,  as  none  can  bear  this  their  aspect  so

surprising  and  as  it  were  quite  infernal.  For,  in  all  battles  the  eyes  are

vanquished first.

 
Beyond the Lygians dwell the Gothones, under the rule of a King; and thence

held in subjection somewhat stricter than the other German nations, yet not so

strict as to extinguish all their liberty. Immediately adjoining are the Rugians

and Lemovians upon the coast of the ocean, and of these several nations the

characteristics are a round shield, a short sword and kingly government. Next

occur the communities of the Suiones, situated in the ocean itself; and besides

their  strength  in  men  and  arms,  very  powerful  at  sea.  The  form  of  their

vessels varies thus far from ours, that they have prows at each end, so as to be

always ready to row to shore without turning; nor are they moved by sails,

nor on their sides have benches of oars placed, but the rowers ply here and

there in all parts of the ship alike, as in some rivers is done, and change their

oars from place to place, just as they shift their course hither or thither. To

wealth also, amongst them, great veneration is paid, and thence a single ruler

governs  them,  without  all  restriction  of  power,  and  exacting  unlimited

obedience. Neither here, as amongst other nations of Germany, are arms used

indifferently by all, but shut up and warded under the care of a particular

keeper, who in truth too is always a slave: since from all sudden invasions

and  attacks  from  their  foes,  the  ocean  protects  them:  besides  that  armed

bands, when they are not employed, grow easily debauched and tumultuous.

The truth is, it suits not the interest of an arbitrary Prince, to trust the care and

power of arms either with a nobleman or with a freeman, or indeed with any

man above the condition of a slave.

 
Beyond  the  Suiones  is  another  sea,  one  very  heavy  and  almost  void  of

agitation; and by it the whole globe is thought to be bounded and environed,

for that the reflection of the sun, after his setting, continues till his rising, so

bright as to darken the stars. To this, popular opinion has added, that the

tumult also of his emerging from the sea is heard, that forms divine are then

seen, as likewise the rays about his head. Only thus far extend the limits of

nature, if what fame says be true. Upon the right of the Suevian Sea the

Aestyan  nations  reside,  who  use  the  same  customs  and  attire  with  the

Suevians; their language more resembles that of Britain. They worship theMother of the Gods. As the characteristic of their national superstition, they

wear the images of wild boars. This alone serves them for arms, this is the

safeguard of all, and by this every worshipper of the Goddess is secured even

amidst  his  foes.  Rare  amongst  them  is  the  use  of  weapons  of  iron,  but

frequent that of clubs. In producing of grain and the other fruits of the earth,

they labour with more assiduity and patience than is suitable to the usual

laziness of Germans. Nay, they even search the deep, and of all the rest are

the only people who gather amber. They call it glasing, and find it amongst

the  shallows  and  upon  the  very  shore.  But,  according  to  the  ordinary

incuriosity and ignorance of Barbarians, they have neither learnt, nor do they

inquire, what is its nature, or from what cause it is produced. In truth it lay

long neglected amongst the other gross discharges of the sea; till from our

luxury, it gained a name and value. To themselves it is of no use: they gather

it rough, they expose it in pieces coarse and unpolished, and for it receive a

price with wonder. You would however conceive it to be a liquor issuing

from trees, for that in the transparent substance are often seen birds and other

animals, such as at first stuck in the soft gum, and by it, as it hardened,

became quite enclosed. I am apt to believe that, as in the recesses of the East

are found woods and groves dropping frankincense and balms, so in the isles

and continent of the West such gums are extracted by the force and proximity

of the sun; at first liquid and flowing into the next sea, then thrown by winds

and waves upon the opposite shore. If you try the nature of amber by the

application of fire, it kindles like a torch; and feeds a thick and unctuous

flame very high scented, and presently becomes glutinous like pitch or rosin.

 
Upon the Suiones, border the people Sitones; and, agreeing with them in all

other things, differ from them in one, that here the sovereignty is exercised by

a woman. So notoriously do they degenerate not only from a state of liberty,

but even below a state of bondage. Here end the territories of the Suevians.

 
Whether  amongst  the  Sarmatians  or  the  Germans  I  ought  to  account  the

Peucinians, the Venedians, and the Fennians, is what I cannot determine;

though  the  Peucinians,  whom  some  call  Basstarnians,  speak  the  same

language with the Germans, use the same attire, build like them, and live like

them,  in  that  dirtiness  and  sloth  so  common  to  all.  Somewhat  they  are

corrupted  into  the  fashion  of  the  Sarmatians  by  the  intermarriages  of  the

principal sort with that nation: from whence the Venedians have derived very

many  of  their  customs  and  a  great  resemblance.  For  they  are  continuallytraversing and infesting with robberies all the forests and mountains lying

between the Peucinians and Fennians. Yet they are rather reckoned amongst

the Germans, for that they have fixed houses, and carry shields, and prefer

travelling on foot, and excel in swiftness. Usages these, all widely differing

from those of the Sarmatians, who live on horseback and dwell in waggons.

In  wonderful  savageness  live  the  nation  of  the  Fennians,  and  in  beastly

poverty, destitute of arms, of horses, and of homes; their food, the common

herbs;  their  apparel,  skins;  their  bed,  the  earth;  their  only  hope  in  their

arrows, which for want of iron they point with bones. Their common support

they have from the chase, women as well as men; for with these the former

wander up and down, and crave a portion of the prey. Nor other shelter have

they  even  for  their  babes,  against  the  violence  of  tempests  and  ravening

beasts, than to cover them with the branches of trees twisted together: this a

reception for the old men, and hither resort the young. Such a condition they

judge more happy than the painful occupation of cultivating the ground, than

the labour of rearing houses, than the agitations of hope and fear attending

the defence of their own property or the seizing that of others. Secure against

the  designs  of  men,  secure  against  the  malignity  of  the  Gods,  they  have

accomplished a thing of infinite difficulty; that to them nothing remains even

to be wished.

 
What  further  accounts  we  have  are  fabulous:  as  that  the  Hellusians  and

Oxiones have the countenances and aspect of men, with the bodies and limbs

of savage beasts. This, as a thing about which I have no certain information, I

shall leave untouched.

 TACITUS:
AGRICOLA

 
      THE LIFE OF AGRICOLA, WITH AN ACCOUNT OF THE          SITUATION, CLIMATE, AND PEOPLE OF BRITAIN.

 
 

 
Amongst the Ancients, it was common to transmit to posterity the characters

and exploits of memorable men: nor in truth in our own times has the Age,

however  indifferent  about  what  concerns  itself,  failed  to  observe  the  like

usage, whenever any spirit eminent for great and signal virtue has vanquished

and triumphed over the blindness of such as cannot distinguish right from

wrong, as well as over the spite of malignants; for, spite and blindness are

evils common to great States and to small. But, as in those early times there

was found greater propensity to feats of renown, and more scope to perform

them; so whoever excelled in a happy genius was naturally led to display the

merits and memory of the virtuous dead, without all view to court favour, or

to gain advantages, but only by the motives and recompense flowing from a

benevolent  and  conscientious  mind.  Indeed  there  were  several  who,  in

recounting  their  own  lives,  concluded,  that  they  thence  showed  rather  a

confidence in their own integrity and demeanour than any mark of arrogance.

Neither  was  the  account  which  Rutilius  and  Scaurus  gave  of  themselves,

thence the less credited or the more censured. So true it is, that the several

virtues are best understood and most prized, during the same times in which

they are most easily produced. But to myself, who am going to relate the life

of a person deceased, I find pardon necessary; which I should not have asked,

were I not about to revive and traverse times so sanguinary, and baneful to all

virtue.

 
We  find  it  recorded,  that  for  celebrating  the  praises  of  Paetus  Thrasea,

Arulenus Rusticus suffered a deadly doom; as did Herennius Senesce, for

those of Helvidius Priscus. Nor upon the persons of the authors only was this

cruelty inflicted, but also upon the books themselves; since to the Triumvirate

of Justice orders were sent, that in the Forum and place of popular elections,

the works of men so illustrious for parts and genius should be burned. Yes, in

this very fire they imagined, that they should abolish the voice and utterance

of the Roman People, with the liberty of the Senate, and all the ideas and

remembrances  of  humankind.  For,  they  had  besides  expelled  all  the

professors  of  philosophy,  [Footnote:  When  Vespasian's  worthless  son

"cleared Rome of what most sham'd him:" Domitian banished Epictetus, and

the other philosophers.] and driven every laudable science into exile, thatnought which was worthy and honest might anywhere be seen. Mighty surely

was the testimony which we gave of our patience; and as our forefathers had

beheld the ultimate consummation of liberty, so did we of bondage, since

through dread of informers and inquisitions of State, we were bereft of the

common intercourse of speech and attention. Nay, with our utterance we had

likewise lost our memory; had it been equally in our power to forget, as to be

silent.

 
Now indeed at length our spirit returns. Yet, though from the first dawn of

this very happy age begun by the reign of Nerva, he blended together two

things  once  found  irreconcilable,  public  liberty  and  sovereign  power;  and

though Trajan his adopted successor be daily augmenting the felicity of the

State; insomuch that for the general security not only hopes and vows are

conceived,  but  even  firm  assurance  follows  these  vows,  and  their  full

accomplishment is seen; such however is the frailty of man and its effects,

that much more slow is the progress of the remedies than of the evils; and as

human bodies attain their growth by tedious degrees, and are subject to be

destroyed in an instant, so it is much easier to suppress than to revive the

efforts of genius and study. For, upon the mind there steals a pleasure even in

sloth and remissness, and that very inactivity which was at first hated, is at

last loved. Will it not be found that during a course of fifteen years (a mighty

space  in  the  age  of  mortal  man)  numbers  perished  through  fortuitous

disasters, and all men noted for promptness and spirit were cut off by the

cruelty of the Emperor? Few we are, who have escaped; and if I may so

speak, we have survived not only others but even ourselves, when from the

middle of our life so many years were rent; whence from being young we are

arrived at old age, from being old we are nigh come to the utmost verge of

mortality, all in a long course of awful silence. I shall however find no cause

of regret from having framed an historical deduction of our former bondage,

as also a testimony of the public blessings which at present we enjoy; though,

in doing it, my style be negligent and unpolished. To the honour of Agricola

my wife's father, this present book is in the meantime dedicated; and, as 'tis a

declaration of filial duty and affection, will thence be commended, at least

excused.

 
* * * * *

 
A.D.  40.  Cnaeus  Julius  Agricola  was  born  in  the  ancient  and  illustriousColony  of  Forojulium,  [Footnote:  Fréjus.]  and  both  his  grandfathers  were

Procurators to the Emperors; a dignity peculiar to the Equestrian Order. His

father  Julius  Graecinus  was  a  Senator,  and  noted  for  eloquence  and

philosophy. By these his virtues, he earned the wrath of Caligula. For, he was

by him ordered to accuse Marcus Silanus, and put to death for refusing. His

mother was Julia Procilla, a lady of singular chastity. Under her eye and

tender care he was reared, and spent his childhood and youth in the continual

pursuit and cultivation of worthy accomplishments. What guarded him from

the  allurements  of  the  vicious  (besides  his  own  virtuous  disposition  and

natural innocence) was, that for the seat and nursery of his studies, whilst yet

very little, he had the city of Marseilles; a place well tempered and framed, as

in it all the politeness of the Greeks and all the provincial parsimony are

blended together. I remember he was wont to declare, that in his early youth

he studied Philosophy and the Law with more avidity than was allowable to a

Roman and a Senator; till the discretion of his mother checked his spirit,

engaged with passion and ardour in the pursuit. In truth, his superior and

elevated  genius  thirsted,  with  more  vehemence  than  caution,  after  the

loveliness and lustre of a name and renown so mighty and sublime. Reason

and age afterwards qualified his heat; and, what is a task extremely hard, he

satisfied himself with a limited measure of philosophy.

 
A.D. 59-62. The first rudiments of war he learnt in Britain, under that prudent

and vigilant commander Suetonius Paulinus; by whom he was chosen and

distinguished,  as  his  domestic  companion.  Neither  did  Agricola  behave

licentiously, after the manner of young men, who turn warfare into riot; nor

assumed the title and office of a Tribune without the sufficiency, in order to

use it slothfully in feats of pleasure and absence from duty, but to know the

Province, to be known to the army, to learn of such as had experience, to

follow such as were worthy and brave, to seek for no exploits for ostentation,

to refuse none through fear, and in all his pursuits was equally zealous and

active. Indeed at no time had Britain been under greater combustions, nor our

affairs there more precarious. Our veterans were slaughtered, our colonies

burned down, our armies surprised and taken. At that juncture the struggle

was  for  life;  afterwards,  for  victory.  Now  though  all  these  affairs  were

transacted by the counsels and conduct of another than Agricola, and though

the stress of the whole, with the glory of recovering the Province, accrued to

the General; they all however proved to the young man matters of skill, ofexperience and stimulation; and there seized his soul a passion for military

glory,  a  spirit  disgustful  to  the  times,  when  of  men  signally  eminent  a

malignant opinion was entertained, and when as much peril arose from a

great character as from a bad.

 
A.D.  62-68.  Departing  from  hence  to  Rome  for  the  exercise  of  public

dignities, he there married Domitia Decidiana, a lady splendid in her descent;

and to him, who was aspiring to higher honours, this marriage proved a great

ornament and support. In marvellous unanimity they also lived, in a course of

mutual tenderness and mutual preference; a temper commendable in both,

only that the praise of a good wife rises in proportion to the contumely of a

bad. His lot as Quaestor fell upon Asia, where he had Salvius Titianus for

Proconsul. But neither the Province nor the Proconsul corrupted his probity,

though the country was very rich, nay, prepared as a prey for men corruptly

disposed; and Titianus, a man bent upon all acts of rapine, was ready, upon

the  smallest  encouragement,  to  have  purchased  a  mutual  connivance  in

iniquity. In Asia he was enriched by the birth of a daughter, tending at once

to his consolation and the support of his family; for the son born to him

before,  he  very  soon  lost.  The  interval  between  his  bearing  the  office  of

Quaestor  and  that  of  Tribune  of  the  People,  and  even  the  year  of  his

Tribuneship, he passed in repose and inactivity; as well aware of the spirit of

the times under Nero, when sloth and heaviness served for wisdom. With the

like indolence he held the Praetorship, and in the same quiet and silence. For

upon him the jurisdiction of that dignity fell not. The public pastimes and the

empty gaieties of the office, he exhibited according to the rules of good sense

and  to  the  measure  of  his  wealth,  in  a  manner  though  remote  from

prodigality, yet deserving popular applause. As he was next appointed by

Galba  to  make  research  into  the  gifts  and  oblations  appertaining  to  the

temples, he proceeded with such diligence and an examination so strict, that

the State suffered from no sacrilege save that of Nero.

 
A.D. 69 and 70. In the year following he suffered a grievous blow in his spirit

and family. For, Otho's fleet, which continued roving upon the coast and

pursuing  rapine,  whilst  they  were  ravaging  Intemelium  [Footnote:

Vinitimiglia.] (a part of Liguria) slew the mother of Agricola upon her estate

there, and plundered the estate itself with a great part of her treasure, which

had indeed proved the cause of the murder. As he therefore went from Rome

to solemnise her funeral, he had tidings upon the road that Vespasian waspursuing the sovereignty, and instantly espoused his party. In the beginning

of this reign all the exercise of power and the government of the city, were

entirely in the hands of Mucianus; for, Domitian was yet extremely young,

and, of the Imperial fortune of his father, assumed nothing further than a

latitude  for  debauchery.  Mucianus,  who  had  despatched  Agricola  to  levy

forces,  and  found  him  to  have  acted  in  that  trust  with  uprightness  and

magnanimity, preferred him to the command of the twentieth legion; as soon

as  he  was  informed,  that  he  who  commanded  it  before  was  engaged  in

seditious practices. Indeed that legion had with great slowness and reluctance

been brought to swear allegiance to Vespasian, nay, was grown over mighty

and  even  formidable  to  the  commanders-in-chief:  so  that  their  own

commander  was  found  void  of  authority  to  control  them;  though  it  is

uncertain whether from the temper of the man or from that of the soldiers.

Thus  Agricola  was  chosen,  at  once  to  succeed  him,  and  to  punish

delinquency in them; and exercising moderation altogether rare, would rather

have it thought, that he had found them unblamable than made them so.

 
A.D. 72. Over Britain at that juncture Vettius Bolanus bore rule, but with

more  complacency  than  suited  a  province  so  fierce  and  untamed.  Hence

Agricola restrained his own heat, and held within bounds the ardour of his

spirit, as he was well skilled how to show his obedience, and had thoroughly

learned to blend what was honourable with what was profitable: soon after

this,  Britain  received  for  its  Governor  Petilius  Cerialis,  one  of  Consular

quality.  The  virtue  and  abilities  of  Agricola  had  now  ample  space  for

producing suitable effects. But to him at first Cerialis communicated only the

dangers and fatigues: with him anon he likewise shared the glory; frequently,

for  trial  of  his  prowess,  committed  to  his  conduct  a  part  of  the  army;

sometimes, according to the measure of his success, set him at the head of

forces still larger. Nor did Agricola ever vaunt his exploits to blazon his own

fame.  To  his  general,  as  to  the  Author  of  all,  he,  as  his  instrument  and

inferior,  still  ascribed  his  good  fortune.  Thus  from  his  bravery  in  the

execution of his orders, from his modesty in recounting his deeds of bravery,

he escaped envy, yet failed not to gain glory.

 
A.D.  73-78.  Upon  his  return  from  commanding  a  legion,  the  deified

Vespasian raised him to the rank of a patrician, and afterwards invested him

with  the  government  of  the  Province  of  Aquitaine;  a  government  of  the

foremost  dignity,  and  given  as  previous  to  the  Consulship,  to  which  thatPrince had destined him. There are many who believe, that to military men

subtilty of spirit is wanting; for that in camps the direction of process and

authority, is rather rough and void of formality; and that where hands and

force are chiefly used, there the address and refinements usual to Courts are

not exercised. Yet Agricola, assisted by his natural prudence, though he was

then engaged only with men of peace and the robe, acquitted himself with

great facility and great uprightness. He carefully distinguished the seasons of

business and the seasons of recess. Whenever he sat in Council or upon the

Tribunals  of  justice,  he  was  grave,  attentive,  awful,  generally  addicted  to

compassion.  The  moment  he  had  fulfilled  the  duties  of  his  office,  he

personated no longer the man of power: he had then cast off all sternness, all

airs  of  State,  and  all  rigour.  Nay,  what  is  very  rarely  to  be  seen,  his

complaisance neither weakened his authority, nor did his severity make him

less amiable. It were an injury to the virtues of so great a man, to particularise

his just dealings, his temperance, and the cleanness of his hands. [Footnote:

"Integritatem atque abstinentiam referre."] In truth glory itself was what he

pursued, not by any ostentation of bravery, nor by any strain of artifice or

address; though of that pursuit even the best men are often fond. Thus he was

far from maintaining any competition with his equals in station, far from any

contest with the Procurators of the Prince: since, to conquer in this contention

he judged to be no glory; and to be crushed by them were disgrace. His

administration  here  lasted  hardly  three  years,  ere  he  was  recalled  to  the

present possession of the Consulship. With this employment there accrued

the public opinion, that for his province Britain would be assigned him, from

no words which had dropped from him about it, but because he was deemed

equal to the office. Common fame does not always err; sometimes it even

directs the public choice. To myself yet very young, whilst he was Consul, he

contracted his daughter, a young lady even then of excellent hopes, and, at

the end of his Consulship, presented her in marriage. He was then forthwith

promoted to the government of Britain, as also invested with the honour of

the Pontificate.

 
The account which I shall here present of the situation and people of Britain,

a subject about which many authors have written, comes not from any design

of setting up my own exactness and genius against theirs, but only because

the country was then first thoroughly subdued. So that such matters as former

writers have, without knowing them, embellished with eloquence, will by mebe recounted according to the truth of evidence and discoveries. Of all the

islands  which  have  reached  the  knowledge  of  the  Romans,  Britain  is  the

largest. It extends towards Germany to the east, towards Spain to the west. To

the south it looks towards Gaul. Its northern shore, beyond which there is no

land,  is  beaten  by  a  sea  vast  and  boundless.  [Footnote:  "Belluosus,  qui

remotis  Obstrepit  Oceanus  Britannis."]  Britain  is  by  Livy  and  Fabius

Rusticus, the former the most eloquent of the ancient historians, the latter of

the moderns, compared in shape to an oblong shield, or a broad knife with

two edges. And such in effect is its figure on this side Caledonia, whence

common opinion has thus also fashioned the whole. But a tract of territory

huge  and  unmeasurable  stretches  forward  to  the  uttermost  shore,  and

straitening by degrees, terminates like a wedge. Round the coast of this sea,

which beyond it has no land, the Roman fleet now first sailed, and thence

proved Britain to be an island, as also discovered and subdued the Isles of

Orkney  till  then  unknown.  Thule  was  likewise  descried,  hitherto  hid  by

winter  under  eternal  snow.  This  sea  they  report  to  be  slow  and  stagnate,

difficult to the rowers, and indeed hardly to be raised by the force of winds.

This I conjecture to be because land and mountains, which are the cause and

materials of tempests, very rarely occur in proportion to the mighty mass of

water, a mass so deep and uninterrupted as not to be easily agitated. An

inquiry into the nature of the ocean and of the tide, is not the purpose of this

work, and about it many have written. One thing I would add, that nowhere is

the power of the sea more extensive than here, forcing back the waters of

many rivers, or carrying them away with its own; nor is its flux and ebbings

confined to the banks and shore; but it works and winds itself far into the

country, nay forms bays in rocks and mountains, as if the same were its

native bed.

 
For the rest; who were the first inhabitants of Britain, whether natives of its

own, or foreigners, can be little known amongst a people thus barbarous. In

their looks and persons they vary; from whence arguments and inferences are

formed. For, the red hair of the Caledonians and their large limbs, testify their

descent to be from Germany. The swarthy complexion of the Silures, and

their hair, which is generally curled, with their situation opposite to the coast

of Spain, furnish ground to believe, that the ancient Iberians had arrived from

thence here, and taken possession of the territory. They who live next to Gaul

are also like the Gauls; whether it be that the spirit of the original stock fromwhich they sprang, still remains, or whether in countries near adjoining, the

genius of the climate confers the same form and disposition upon the bodies

of men. To one who considers the whole, it seems however credible, that the

Gauls at first occupied this their neighbouring coast. That their sacred rites

are  the  same,  you  may  learn  from  their  being  possessed  with  the  same

superstition of every sort. Their speech does not much vary. In daring and

dangers they are prompted by the like boldness, and with the like affright

avoid them when they approach. In the Britons however superior ferocity and

defiance is found, as in a people not yet softened by a long peace. For we

learn  from  history,  that  the  Gauls  too  flourished  in  warlike  prowess  and

renown: amongst them afterwards, together with peace and idleness, there

entered effeminacy; and thus with the loss of their liberty they lost their spirit

and  magnanimity.  The  same  happened  to  those  of  the  Britons  who  were

conquered long ago. The rest still continue such as the Gauls once were.

 
Their principal force consists in their foot. Some nations amongst them make

also war in chariots. The more honourable person always drives: under his

leading his followers fight. They were formerly subject to Kings. They are

now swayed by several chiefs, and rent into factions and parties, according to

the  humour  and  passions  of  those  their  leaders.  Nor  against  nations  thus

powerful does aught so much avail us, as that they consult not in a body for

the security of the whole. It is rare that two or three communities assemble

and unite to repulse any public danger threatening to all. So that whilst only a

single community fought at a time, they were every one vanquished. The sky

from frequent clouds and rain is dull and hazy. Excessive cold they feel not.

Their days in length surpass ours. Their nights are very clear, and at the

extremity of the country, very short; so that between the setting and return of

the day, you perceive but small interval. They affirm, that were it not for the

intervention of clouds, the rays of the sun would be seen in the night, and that

he doth not rise and fall, but only pass by: for that the extremities of the earth,

which are level, yielding but a low shadow, prevent darkness from rising high

and spreading; and thence night is far short of reaching the stars and the sky.

The soil is such, that except the olive and the vine, and other vegetables,

which are wont to be raised in hotter climes, it readily bears all fruits and

grain,  and  is  very  fertile.  It  quickly  produces,  but  its  productions  ripen

slowly;  and  of  both  these  effects  there  is  the  same  cause,  the  extreme

humidity of the earth and of the sky. Britain yields gold and silver, with othermetals, all which prove the prize and reward of the Conquerors. The sea also

breeds pearls, but of a dark and livid hue, a defect by some ascribed to the

unskilfulness of such as gather them. For, in the Red Sea they are pulled from

the rocks alive and vigorous. In Britain they are gathered at random, such as

the sea casts them upon the shore. For myself; I am much apter to believe,

that nature has failed to give the pearls perfection, than that we fail in avarice.

[Footnote: "Ego facilius crediderim naturam margaritis de esse; quam nobis

avaritiam."]

 
The Britons themselves are a people who cheerfully comply with the levies

of men, and with the imposition of taxes, and with all the duties enjoined by

Government; provided they receive no illegal treatment and insults from their

governors: those they bear with impatience. Nor have the Romans any further

subdued them than only to obey just laws, but never to submit to be slaves.

Even the deified Julius Caesar, the first of all the Romans who entered Britain

with  an  army,  though  by  gaining  a  battle  he  frightened  the  natives,  and

became master of the coast; [Footnote: Caesar conquered to the north of the

Thames.] yet may be thought to have rather presented posterity with a view

of the country, than to have conveyed down the possession. Anon the civil

wars ensued, and against the Commonwealth were turned the arms of her

own chiefs and leaders. Thus Britain was long forgot, and continued to be so

even during peace. This was what Augustus called Reason of State, but what

Tiberius  styled  the  Ordinance  of  Augustus.  That  Caligula  meditated  an

invasion of Britain in person, is well known: but he possessed a spirit, as

precipitate and wild, so presently surfeited with any design whatever; besides

that all his mighty efforts against Germany were quite baffled. The deified

Claudius  accomplished  the  undertaking;  having  thither  transported  the

legions, with a number of auxiliary forces, and associated Vespasian into the

direction  of  the  design:  an  incident  which  proved  the  introduction  to  his

approaching fortune. There, nations were subdued, Kings taken captive, and

Vespasian placed to advantage in the eye of the Fates.

 
The first Governor of Consular quality, was Aulus Plautius, then Ostorius

Scapula, both signal in war: and by degrees the nearest part of Britain was

reduced into the condition of a Province. To secure it, a colony of veterans

was  likewise  settled.  To  the  British  King  Cogidunus  certain  communities

were given, a Prince who even till our times continued in perfect fidelity to

us.  For,  with  the  Roman  People  it  is  a  custom  long  since  received,  andpractised  of  old,  that  for  establishing  the  bondage  of  nations,  they  are  to

employ even Kings as their instruments. Afterwards followed Didius Gallus,

and just preserved what acquisitions his predecessors had made; only that

further in the island he raised some forts, and very few they were, purely for

the name and opinion of having enlarged his government. Next to Didius

came Veranius, and died in less than a year. Then immediately succeeded

Suetonius Paulinus, who during two years commanded with success, subdued

fresh nations and established garrisons. Trusting to these he went to assail the

Isle of Anglesey, as a place which supplied the revolters with succours, and

thus left the country behind him exposed to the enemy.

 
For, the Britons, when through the absence of the Governor they were eased

of their fear, began to commune together concerning the miseries of bondage,

to  recount  their  several  grievances,  and  so  to  construe  and  heighten  their

injuries  as  effectually  to  inflame  their  resentments.  "Their  patience,"  they

said, "availed them nothing, further than to invite the imposition of heavier

burdens upon a people who thus tamely bore any. In times past they had only

a single King: they were now surrendered to two. One of these the Governor-

General, tyrannised over their bodies and lives; the Imperial Procurator, who

was the other, over their substance and fortunes. Equally pernicious to their

subjects  was  any  variance  between  these  their  rulers,  as  their  good

intelligence  and  unanimity.  Against  them  the  one  employed  his  own

predatory bands, as did the other his Centurions and their men; and both

exercised violence alike, both treated them with equal insults and contumely.

To such height was oppression grown, that nothing whatever was exempt

from their avarice, nothing whatever from their lust. He who in the day of

battle spoiled others, was always stronger than they. But here it was chiefly

by the cowardly and effeminate that their houses were seized, their children

forced away, and their men obliged to enlist; as if their country were the only

thing for which the Britons knew not how to die. In truth, what a small force

would all the soldiers arrived in the island appear; would the Britons but

compute their own numbers? It was from this consideration that Germany

had thrown off the same yoke, though a country defended only by a river, and

not like this, by the ocean. To animate themselves to take arms, they had their

country,  their  wives,  their  parents;  whilst  these  their  oppressors  were

prompted by nothing but their avarice and sensuality: nor would they fail to

withdraw from the island, as even the deified Julius had withdrawn, wouldthe natives but imitate the bravery of their forefathers, and not be dismayed

with  the  issue  of  an  encounter  or  two.  Amongst  people  like  themselves

reduced to misery, superior ardour was ever found, as also greater firmness

and  perseverance.  Towards  the  Britons,  at  this  juncture  even  the  Gods

manifested compassion, since they thus kept the Roman General at such a

distance, thus held the Roman army confined in another island. Nay, already

they themselves had gained a point the most difficult to be gained, that they

could  now  deliberate  about  measures  common  to  all:  for,  doubtless  more

perilous it were to be discovered forming such counsels, than openly to put

them in execution."

 
When with these and the like reasons they had instigated one another, they

unanimously took arms under the leading of Boudicea, [Footnote: Boadicea.]

a  woman  of  royal  descent;  for,  in  conferring  sovereignty,  they  make  no

distinction of sexes. They then forthwith assailed on every side the soldiers

dispersed here and there in forts, and having stormed and sacked the several

garrisons,  fell  upon  the  colony  itself,  as  the  seat  and  centre  of  public

servitude: nor was any kind of cruelty omitted, with which rage and victory

could possibly inspire the hearts of Barbarians. In truth, had not Paulinus,

upon learning the revolt of the Province, come with notable speed to its relief,

Britain had been lost. Yet by the success of a single battle, he reduced the

country to its old subjection, though several continued in arms, such namely

as were conscious of inciting the rebellion, and under personal dread from the

spirit of the Governor. He, though otherwise a signal commander, yet treated

such as had surrendered themselves in a manner very imperious; and, as one

who likewise avenged his own particular injury, thence exerted the greater

rigour. Insomuch that in his room Petronius Turpilianus was sent, as one

whose behaviour would prove more relenting, one who being unacquainted

with the delinquencies of the enemies, would be more gentle in accepting

their remorse and submission. Turpilianus, when he had quite appeased the

late  commotions,  ventured  upon  nothing  further,  and  then  delivered  the

Province to Trebellius Maximus. He, still more unwarlike and inactive than

his  predecessor,  and  nowise  trained  in  camps  and  armies,  maintained  the

tranquillity of the Province by a method of softness and complaisance. The

Barbarians had now likewise learned to forgive such vices as humoured them

in  pleasure  and  ease.  Moreover,  the  civil  wars  which  then  intervened,

furnished a proper excuse for the lazy behaviour of the Governor. But hefound  himself  greatly  embarrassed  with  faction  and  discord;  for  that  the

soldiers, who had ever been inured to expeditions and feats in the field, were

through  idleness  grown  turbulent  and  licentious.  Trebellius,  by  flight  and

lurking, escaped the present fury of the army: he afterwards resumed the

command, but with an authority altogether precarious, without all spirit and

destitute of all dignity; as if between him and them articles had been settled,

that the soldiers should retain their licentious behaviour, and the General be

permitted to enjoy his life. During this mutiny no blood was spilled. Neither

did Vettius Bolanus, as the civil war yet subsisted, exert any discipline in

Britain.  Towards  the  enemy  there  still  remained  the  same  sloth  and

negligence, with the same insolent spirit in the camp: this difference only

there was, that Bolanus was a man perfectly innocent; and being subject to no

hate, as he was free from all crimes, he had instead of authority over them,

only gained their affections.

 
But, when Vespasian had, with the possession of the world, also recovered

Britain, in it were seen great commanders, noble armies, and the hopes of the

enemy quite abated, Petilius Cerialis, particularly, at his first entrance, struck

them  at  once  with  general  terror,  by  attacking  the  community  of  the

Brigantes,  reckoned  the  most  populous  of  the  whole  Province.  There

followed many encounters, such as sometimes proved very bloody. So that he

held most part of their country as his conquest, or continued to ravage it by

war.  In  truth,  though  the  exploits  of  Cerialis  would  have  eclipsed  the

vigilance and fame of any other successor, yet Julius Frontinus sustained in

his turn the mighty task; and, as he was a man as great and able as he found

scope and safety to be, he by the sword utterly subdued the powerful and

warlike nation of the Silures; though besides the bravery of the enemy, he

was likewise obliged to struggle with the difficulties of places and situation.

 
A.D. 78. Such was the condition in which Agricola found Britain, such to

have been the vicissitudes of the war there, upon his arrival about the middle

of summer, a time when the Roman soldiers, supposing the service of the

season to be concluded, were securely bent upon inaction and repose, as were

the enemy upon any opportunity to annoy the Romans. The Community of

the Ordovicans had not long before his coming slaughtered, almost entirely, a

band of horse stationed upon their confines; and by an essay so notable the

Province in general became roused; while such as were intent upon present

war, commended the action as an example and a call to the whole, and otherswere for delaying till they had discovered the spirit of the new Lieutenant-

General. Now though the summer was over, though the troops were severed

and  lay  dispersed  over  the  Province,  though  the  soldiers  had  assured

themselves of rest for the residue of the year (a heavy obstacle and very

discouraging to one who is commencing war), nay, though many judged it

better only to guard the places which were threatened and precarious; yet

Agricola determined to meet the danger. Hence drawing together the choice

bands of the legions, with a small body of auxiliaries, he led them against the

Ordovicans; and as these dared not descend into equal ground, he, who by

sharing equal danger, would inspire his men with equal courage, marching in

person before his army, conducted them to the encounter upon the ascent.

Almost the whole nation was here cut off; but as he was well aware, that it

behoved him to urge and maintain this his fame, and that with the issue of his

first attempts all the rest would correspond, he conceived a design to reduce

the Isle of Anglesey, a conquest from which Paulinus was recalled by the

general revolt of Britain, as above I have recounted. But, as this counsel was

suddenly concerted, and therefore ships were found wanting, such was the

firmness and capacity of the General, that without ships he transported his

men. From the auxiliaries he detached all their chosen men, such as knew the

fords,  and  according  to  the  usage  of  their  country  were  dexterous  in

swimming, so as, in the water, at once to manage themselves, and their horses

and  arms.  These,  unencumbered  with  any  of  their  baggage,  he  caused  to

make a descent and onset so sudden, that the enemy were quite struck with

consternation, as men who apprehended nothing but a fleet and transports,

and a formal invasion by sea, and now believed no enterprise difficult and

insurmountable to such as came thus determined to war. Thus they sued for

peace  and  even  surrendered  the  island;  and  thence  Agricola  was  already

considered as a very great and even renowned commander: for that, at his

first entrance into the Province, a time which other governors are wont to

waste  in  show  and  parade,  or  in  courting  compliment  and  addresses,  he

preferred feats of labour and of peril. Nor did he apply this his good fortune

and success to any purpose of vainglory: so that upon the bridling of such as

were vanquished before, he would not bestow the title of an expedition or of

victory; nor in truth would he so much as with the bare honour of the laurel

distinguish these his exploits. But even by disguising his fame, he enlarged it;

as  men  considered  how  vast  must  be  his  future  views,  when  he  thus

smothered in silence deeds so noble. 
For  the  rest;  as  he  was  acquainted  with  the  temper  of  the  people  in  his

Province; as he had also learned from the conduct and experience of others,

that little is gained by arms where grievances and oppressions follow, he

determined to cut off all the causes of war. Beginning therefore with himself

and those appertaining to him, he checked and regulated his own household;

a  task  which  to  many  proves  not  less  difficult  than  that  of  governing  a

province. By none of his domestics, bond or freed, was aught that concerned

the  public  transacted.  In  raising  the  soldiers  to  a  superior  class,  he  was

swayed by no personal interest or partiality, nor by the recommendation and

suit of the Centurions, but by his own opinion and persuasion, that the best

soldiers were ever the most faithful. All that passed he would know; though

all that was amiss he would not punish. Upon small offences he bestowed

pardon; for such as were great he exercised proportionable severity. Nor did

he always exact the punishment assigned, but frequently was satisfied with

compunction and remorse. In conferring offices and employments he rather

chose  men  who  would  not  transgress,  than  such  as  he  must  afterwards

condemn for transgressing. Though the imposition of tribute and of grain had

been augmented, yet he softened it by causing a just and equal distribution of

all public burdens; since he abolished whatever exactions had been devised

for the lucre of particulars, and were therefore borne with more regret than

the tribute itself. For, the inhabitants were forced to bear the mockery of

attending at their own barns, locked up by the publicans, and of purchasing

their own corn of the monopolists, nay, of selling it afterwards back again at

a poor price. They were moreover enjoined to take long journeys, and carry

grain across the several countries to places extremely distant; insomuch that

the several communities, instead of supplying the winter-quarters which lay

adjoining, must furnish such as were remote and difficultly travelled, to the

end, that what was easy to be had by all, might produce gain to a few.

 
A.D. 79. By suppressing these grievances immediately in his first year, he

gained a high character to a state of peace; a state which, either through the

neglect or connivance of his predecessors, was till then dreaded no less than

that of war. But, upon the coming of summer, he assembled his army; then

proceeded to commend such of the men who in marching observed their duty

and rank, and to check such as were loose and straggling. He himself always

chose  the  ground  for  encamping:  the  salt  marshes,  friths,  and  woods  he

himself always first examined, and to the enemies all the while allowed not amoment's  quiet  or  recess,  but  was  ever  distressing  them  with  sudden

incursions and ravages. Then, having sufficiently alarmed and terrified them,

his next course was to spare them, thus to tempt them with the sweetness and

allurements of peace. By this conduct, several communities which till that

day had asserted a state of equality and independence, came to lay down all

hostility, gave hostages, and were begirt with garrisons and fortresses, erected

with such just contrivance and care, that no part of Britain hitherto known

escaped thenceforward from being annoyed by them.

 
The following winter was employed in measures extremely advantageous and

salutary. For, to the end that these people, thus wild and dispersed over the

country, and thence easily instigated to war, might by a taste of pleasures be

reconciled  to  inactivity  and  repose,  he  first  privately  exhorted  them,  then

publicly assisted them, to build temples, houses and places of assembling.

Upon  such  as  were  willing  and  assiduous  in  these  pursuits  he  heaped

commendations,  and  reproofs  upon  the  lifeless  and  slow.  So  that  a

competition for this distinction and honour, had all the force of necessity. He

was already taking care to have the sons of their chiefs taught the liberal

sciences, already preferring the natural capacity of the Britons to the studied

acquirements of the Gauls; and such was his success, that they who had so

lately scorned to learn the Roman language, were become fond of acquiring

the Roman eloquence. Thence they began to honour our apparel, and the use

of the Roman gown grew frequent amongst them. [Footnote: "Inde etiam

habitus nostri honor, et frequens toga."] By degrees they proceeded to the

incitements and charms of vice and dissoluteness, to magnificent galleries,

sumptuous bagnios, and all the stimulations and elegance of banqueting. Nay,

all this innovation was by the unexperienced styled politeness and humanity,

when it was indeed part of their bondage.

 
A.D. 80. During the third year of his command, in pursuit of his conquests he

discovered new people, by continuing his devastations through the several

nations quite to the mouth of the Tay: so the frith is called. Whence such

terror seized the foe, that they durst not attack our army though sorely shaken

and annoyed by terrible tempests: nay, the Romans had even time to secure

possession  by  erecting  forts.  It  was  observed  of  Agricola  by  men  of

experience, that never had any captain more sagely chosen his stations for

commodiousness and situation; for that no place of strength founded by him,

was ever taken by violence, or abandoned upon articles or despair. Fromthese their strongholds frequent excursions were made; for, against any long

siege they were supplied with provisions for a year. Thus they passed the

winter there without all apprehension: every single fort defended itself. So

that in all their attempts upon them the enemies were baffled, and thence

reduced to utter despair; for that they could not, as formerly they were wont,

repair their losses in the summer by their success in the winter; since now

whether it were winter or summer, they were equally defeated. Neither did

Agricola ever arrogate to himself the glory of exploits performed by others:

were he a Centurion or were he Commander of a legion, in the General he

was sure to find a sincere witness of his achievements. By some he is said to

have been over sharp in his reproofs, since he was one who, as to them that

were good he abounded in courtesy, appeared withal stern and unpleasant to

the bad. But from his anger no spleen remained. In him you had no dark

reserves, no boding silence to fear. More honourable he thought it to give

open offence than to foster secret hate.

 
A.D. 81. The fourth summer was employed in settling and securing what

territories he had overrun: indeed would the bravery of the armies and the

glory of the Roman name, have suffered it, there had been then found in

Britain itself a boundary to our conquests there. For, into the rivers Glota and

Bodotria [Footnote: The Clyde and Forth.] the tide from each opposite sea

flows  so  vastly  far  up  the  country,  that  their  heads  are  parted  only  by  a

narrow neck of land, which was now secured with garrisons. Thus of all on

this side we were already masters; since the enemy were driven as it were

into another island.

 
A.D. 82. In the fifth year of the war, Agricola passing the Frith, himself in the

first ship that landed, in many and successful encounters subdued nations till

that time unknown, and placed forces in that part of Britain which fronts

Ireland, more from future views than from any present fear. In truth Ireland,

as  it  lies  just  between  Britain  and  Spain,  and  is  capable  of  an  easy

communication with the coast of Gaul, would have proved of infinite use in

linking together these powerful limbs of the Empire. In size it is inferior to

Britain, but surpasses the islands in our sea. In soil and climate, as also in the

temper and manners of the natives, it varies little from Britain. Its ports and

landings  are  better  known,  through  the  frequency  of  commerce  and

merchants. A petty King of the country, expelled by domestic dissension, was

already received into protection by Agricola, and under the appearance offriendship,  reserved  for  a  proper  occasion.  By  him  I  have  often  heard  it

declared, that with a single legion and a few auxiliaries Ireland might be

conquered and preserved; nay, that such an acquisition were of moment for

the securing of Britain, if, on all sides the Roman arms were seen, and all

national liberty banished as it were out of sight.

 
A.D.  83.  For  the  rest;  on  the  summer  which  began  the  sixth  year  of  his

administration,  as  it  was  apprehended,  that  the  nations  forward  would

universally take arms, and that the ways were all infested with the enemy's

host, his first step was to coast and explore the large communities beyond

Bodotria [Footnote: The Forth.] by the means of his fleet, which was from the

beginning employed by him as part of his forces, and in attending him at this

time made a glorious appearance, when thus by sea and land the war was

urged. In truth, the same camp often contained the foot and the horse and the

marines, all intermixed, and rejoicing in common, severally magnifying their

own feats, their own hazards and adventures: here were displayed the horrors

of  steep  mountains  and  dismal  forests;  there  the  outrages  of  waves  and

tempests. These boasted their exploits by land and against the foe: those the

vanquished  ocean;  all  vying  together  according  to  the  usual  vaunts  and

ostentation  of  soldiers.  Upon  the  Britons  also,  as  from  the  captives  was

learned, the sight of the fleet brought much consternation and dismay; as if,

now that their solitary ocean and recesses of the deep were disclosed and

invaded, the last refuge of the vanquished was cut off. To action and arms,

the  several  people  inhabiting  Caledonia  had  immediate  recourse,  and

advanced with great parade, made still greater by common rumour (as usual

in things that are unknown), for that they daringly assailed our forts, and by

thus insulting and defying us, created much fear and alarm. Nay, there were

some who covering real cowardice under the guise of prudence and counsel,

exhorted a return to the nether side of Bodotria, [Footnote: To retreat south of

the Forth.] for that it were more eligible to retire back than to be driven. He

was apprised the while, that the enemy meant to attack him in divers bands:

so  that,  as  they  surpassed  him  in  numbers  and  in  the  knowledge  of  the

country,  he  too  divided  his  army  into  three  parts,  and  thus  marched,  to

prevent their surrounding him.

 
As soon as this disposition of his was known to the enemy, they suddenly

changed theirs, and all in a body proceeded to fall upon the ninth legion as

the least sufficient and weakest of all; and, as the assault was in the night theyslew  the  guards  and  entered  the  trenches,  aided  by  the  general  sleep  or

general dismay there. They were already pursuing the fight in the camp itself,

when Agricola having from his spies learnt what route the enemy had taken,

and closely following their track, commanded the lightest of his foot and

cavalry to charge them, whilst yet engaged, in the rear, and the whole army

presently after to give a mighty shout. Moreover at break of day, the Roman

banners were beheld refulgent. Thus were the Britons dismayed with double

peril and distress; and to the Romans their courage returned. Hence seeing

their  lives  secure,  they  now  maintained  the  conflict  for  glory.  They  even

returned the attack upon the enemy: insomuch that in the very gates of the

camp a bloody encounter ensued, till the enemy were quite routed; for both

these our armies exerted their might, the one contending to show that they

had brought relief, the other to appear not to have wanted assistance. Indeed,

had not the woods and marshes served for shelter to the fugitives, by this

victory the war had been determined.

 
By this success, with such valour gained, and followed with such renown, the

army was become elated and resolute. With fierce din they cried, "That to

their bravery nothing could prove insurmountable. They must penetrate into

the heart of Caledonia, and advance in a continual succession of battles, till

they had at last found the utmost limits of Britain." Thus it was that they, who

a little before had been so wary and so wise, were now, after the event was

determined, grown full of boasts and intrepidity. Such is the lot of warfare,

very unequal and unjust: in success all men assume part: the disasters are all

imputed to one. Now the Britons, conjecturing the victory to proceed not

from superior courage, but from circumstances improved and the address of

our General, lost nothing of their spirit and defiance, but armed their young

men, removed their wives and children into places of security, and in general

conventions of their several communities engaged them in a league ratified

by  solemn  sacrifices.  And  thus  they  mutually  retired  for  the  winter,  with

minds on both sides abundantly irritated.

 
During the same summer, a cohort of Usipians levied in Germany and thence

transported to Britain, adventured upon a feat very desperate and memorable.

When they had slain the Centurion and soldiers placed amongst them for

training them in discipline, and to serve them for patterns and directors, they

embarked in three pinnaces, forcing the pilots to conduct them; and since one

of these forsook them and fled away, they suspected and therefore killed theother two. As the attempt was not yet divulged, their launching into the deep

was beheld as a wonder. Anon they were tossed hither and thither at the

mercy of the waves: and, as they often engaged for spoil with several of the

Britons,  obliging  them  to  defend  their  property  thus  invaded,  in  which

conflicts they frequently proved victorious, and were sometimes defeated,

they were at last reduced to want so pressing, as to feed upon one another,

first upon the weakest, then upon whomsoever the lot fell. In this manner

were they carried round about Britain, and having lost their vessels through

ignorance how to manage them, they were accounted robbers and pirates, and

fell into the hands first of the Suevians, afterwards of the Frisians. Nay, as

they  were  bought  and  sold  for  slaves,  some  of  them,  through  change  of

masters, were brought over to our side of the Rhine, and grew famous from

the discovery of an adventure so extraordinary.

 
A.D. 84. In the beginning of the summer, Agricola suffered a sore blow in his

family, by losing his son born about a year before. A misfortune which he

neither bore with an ostentation of firmness and unconcern, like many other

men of magnanimity, nor with lamentations and tears worthy only of women.

Besides  that  for  this  affliction,  war  proved  one  of  his  remedies.  When

therefore he had sent forward the navy, which by committing devastations in

several places, would not fail to spread a mighty and perplexing terror, he put

himself at the head of his army lightly equipped, and to it had added some of

the bravest Britons, such as had been well proved through a long course of

peace. Thus he arrived at the Grampian Hills, upon which the enemy were

already  encamped.  For,  the  Britons,  nothing  daunted  by  the  issue  of  the

former  battle,  and  boldly  waiting  either  to  take  vengeance  or  to  suffer

bondage, taught withal at last, that a general union was the best way to repel

common  danger,  had  by  embassies  and  confederacies  drawn  together  the

forces of all their communities. Even then were to be seen thirty thousand

men in arms, and their youth from every quarter were still continuing to flock

in, as were also such of their elderly men as were yet vigorous and hale, they

who were signal in war, and now carried with them their several ensigns of

honour formerly gained in the field. And now Galgacus, he who amongst

their several leaders surpassed all in valour and descent, is said to have spoke

in this strain to the multitude all very pressing for battle,

 
"Whenever I contemplate the causes of the war, and the necessity to which

we are reduced, great is my confidence that this day and this union of yourswill  prove  the  beginning  of  universal  liberty  to  Britain.  For,  besides  that

bondage is what we have never borne, we are so beset that beyond us there is

no further land; nor in truth is there any security left us from the sea whilst

the Roman fleet is hovering upon our coasts. Thus the same expedient which

proves honourable to brave men, is to cowards too become the safest of all

others, even present recourse to battle and arms. The other Britons, in their

past conflicts with the Romans, whence they found various success, had still

a remaining source of hope and succour in this our nation. For, of all the

people  of  Britain  we  are  the  noblest,  and  thence  placed  in  its  innermost

regions, and, as we behold not so much as the coasts of such as are slaves, we

thus preserve even our eyes free and unprofaned by the sight of lawless and

usurped rule. To us who are the utmost inhabitants of the earth, to us the last

who enjoy liberty, this extremity of the globe, this remote tract unknown

even  to  common  fame,  has  to  this  day  proved  the  only  protection  and

defence.  At  present  the  utmost  boundary  of  Britain  is  laid  open;  and  to

conquer  parts  unknown,  is  thought  matter  of  great  pomp  and  boasting.

Beyond us no more people are found, nor aught save seas and rocks; and

already the Romans have advanced into the heart of our country. Against

their pride and domineering you will find it in vain to seek a remedy or

refuge from any obsequiousness or humble behaviour of yours. Plunderers of

the earth these, who in their universal devastations finding countries to fail

them, investigate and rob even the sea. If the enemy be wealthy, he inflames

their  avarice;  if  poor,  their  ambition.  They  are  general  spoilers,  such  as

neither the eastern world nor the western can satiate. They only of all men

thirst after acquisitions both poor and rich, with equal avidity and passion. To

spoil, to butcher, and to commit every kind of violence, they style by a lying

name, Government; and when they have spread a general desolation, they call

it Peace. [Footnote: "Ubi solitudinem faciunt, pacem appellant."]

 
"Dearest to every man are his children and kindred, by the contrivance and

designation of nature. These are snatched from us for recruits, and doomed to

bondage  in  other  parts  of  the  earth.  Our  wives  and  sisters,  however  they

escape rapes and violence as from open enemies, are debauched under the

appearance  and  privilege  of  friendship  and  hospitality.  Our  fortunes  and

possessions they exhaust for tribute, our grain for their provisions. Even our

bodies and limbs are extenuated and wasted, while we are doomed to the

drudgery of making cuts through woods, and drains in bogs, under continualblows and outrages. Such as are born to be slaves are but once sold, and

thenceforward  nourished  by  their  lords.  Britain  is  daily  paying  for  its

servitude, is daily feeding it. Moreover, as in a tribe of household slaves, he

who comes last serves for sport to all his fellows; so in this ancient state of

slavery to which the world is reduced, we, as the freshest slaves and thence

held the most contemptible, are now designed to destruction. For, we have no

fields to cultivate, nor mines to dig, nor ports to make; works for which they

might be tempted to spare us alive: besides that ever distasteful to rulers is

magnanimity and a daring spirit in their subjects. Indeed our very situation,

so solitary and remote, the more security it affords to us, does but raise the

greater jealousy in them. Seeing therefore you are thus bereft of all hopes of

mercy, rouse now at last all your courage, both you to whom life is dearest,

and you to whom glory. The Brigantes, even under the leading of a woman,

burned their colony, stormed their entrenchments, and, had not such success

degenerated into sloth, might have quite cast off the yoke of slavery. Let us

who still preserve our forces entire, us who are still unsubdued, and want not

to  acquire  liberty  but  only  to  secure  it,  manifest  at  once,  upon  the  first

encounter, what kind of men they are that Caledonia has reserved for her own

vindication and defence.

 
"Do you indeed believe the Romans to be equally brave and vigorous in war,

as  during  peace  they  are  vicious  and  dissolute?  From  our  quarrels  and

divisions it is that they have derived their renown, and thus convert the faults

of their enemies to the glory of their own army; an army compounded of

many  nations  so  different,  that  as  it  is  success  alone  which  holds  them

together,  misfortunes  and  disasters  will  surely  dissolve  them.  Unless  you

suppose that the Germans there, that the Gauls, and many of the Britons

(whom with shame I mention), men who however have been all much longer

their enemies than their slaves, are yet attached to them by any real fidelity

and  affection,  whilst  presenting  their  blood  to  establish  a  domination

altogether foreign and unnatural to them all. What restrains them is no more

than awe and terror, frail bonds of endearment; and when these are removed,

such  who  cease  to  fear,  will  immediately  begin  to  manifest  their  hate.

Amongst us is found whatever can stimulate men to victory. The Romans

have no wives to hearten and to urge them. They have here no fathers and

mothers to upbraid them for flying. Many of them have no country at all, or

at least their country is elsewhere. But a few in number they are, ignorant ofthe region and thence struck with dread, whilst to their eyes, whatever they

behold around them, is all wild and strange, even the air and sky, with the

woods  and  the  sea;  so  that  the  Gods  have  in  some  sort  delivered  them

enclosed and bound into our hands.

 
"Be not dismayed with things of mere show, and with a glare of gold and of

silver: this is what can neither wound, nor save. In the very host of the enemy

we shall find bands of our own. The Britons will own and espouse their own

genuine  cause.  The  Gauls  will  recollect  their  former  liberty.  What  the

Usipians  have  lately  done,  the  other  Germans  will  do,  and  abandon  the

Romans.  Thereafter  nothing  remains  to  be  feared.  Their  forts  are

ungarrisoned;  their  colonies  replenished  with  the  aged  and  infirm;  and

between the people and their magistrates, whilst the former are averse to

obedience,  and  the  latter  rule  with  injustice,  the  municipal  cities  are

weakened and full of dissensions. Here you see a general, here an army: there

you may behold tributes and the mines, with all the other train of calamities

and curses ever pursuing men enslaved. Whether all these are to be for ever

imposed, or whether we forthwith avenge ourselves for the attempt, this very

field must determine. As therefore you advance to battle, look back upon

your ancestors, look forward to your posterity."

 
They received his speech joyfully, with chantings, and terrible din, and many

dissonant  shouts,  after  the  manner  of  barbarians.  Already  too  their  bands

moved, and the glittering of their arms appeared, as all the most resolute were

running to the front: moreover the army was forming in battle array; when

Agricola;  who  indeed  saw  his  soldiers  full  of  alacrity,  and  hardly  to  be

restrained even by express cautions, yet chose to discourse to them in the

following strain. "It is now the eighth year, my fellow-soldiers, since through

the virtue and auspicious fortune of the Roman Empire, and by your own

services and fidelity you have been pursuing the conquest of Britain. In so

many expeditions that you have undertaken, in so many battles as you have

fought, you have still had constant occasion either to be exerting your bravery

against  the  foe,  or  your  patience  and  pains  even  against  the  obstacles  of

nature. Neither, during all these struggles, have we found any cause of mutual

regret, I to have conducted such soldiers, or you to have followed such a

captain. We have both passed the limits which we found, I those known to

the ancient governors, you those of former armies; and we possess the very

extremity of Britain, not only in the bruitings of fame and vulgar rumour, butpossess  it  with  our  camps  and  arms.  Britain  is  entirely  discovered,  and

entirely subdued. In truth, as the army has been marching, whilst in passing

morasses and mountains and rivers you have been fatigued and distressed, I

was wont to hear every man remarkably brave ask, When shall we see the

enemy,  when  be  led  to  battle?  Already  they  are  come,  roused  from  their

fastnesses and lurking holes. Here you see the end of all your wishes, here

scope for all your valour, and all things promising and propitious, if you

conquer; but all cross and disastrous, should you be vanquished. For, as to

have  thus  marched  over  a  tract  of  country  so  immense,  to  have  passed

through gloomy forests, to have crossed arms of the deep, is matter of glory

and applause whilst we advance against the enemy; so if we fly before them,

whatever is now most in our favour, will then prove most to our peril. We

know not the situation of the country so well as they know it; we have not

provisions so abundant as they have: but we have limbs and arms; and in

these, all things. For myself; it is a rule long since settled by me, that safety

there is none either to the army or to the general, in turning their backs upon

the foe. Hence it is not only more eligible to lose life honourably than to save

it basely, but security and renown both arise from the same source. Neither

would it be a fate void of glory to fall in this the utmost verge of earth and of

nature.

 
"Were the people now arrayed against you such as were new to you, were

you to engage with bands never before tried, I should animate you by the

examples of other armies. At present, only recollect and enumerate your own

signal exploits, only ask and consult your own eyes. These are they whom but

the last year you utterly discomfited, only by the terror of your shouting,

when, trusting to the darkness of the night, they by stealth attacked a single

legion. These are they who of all the Britons are the most abandoned to fear

and flight, and thence happen thus long to survive all the rest. It is with us as

with  those  who  make  inroads  into  woods  and  forests.  As  beasts  of  the

greatest strength there, are driven thence by the superior force of such as

pursue them, and as the timorous and spiritless fly even at the cry of the

pursuers: in like manner, all the bravest Britons are long since fallen by the

sword. They that remain are only a crowd, fearful and effeminate: nor can

you consider them as men whom you have therefore reached, because they

have persisted to oppose you, but as such whom you have surprised as the

last  and  forlorn  of  all,  who  struck  with  dread  and  bereft  of  spirit,  standbenumbed in yonder field, whence you may gain over them a glorious and

memorable  victory.  Here  complete  all  your  expeditions  and  efforts:  here

close a struggle of fifty years with one great and important day, so that to the

army may not be imputed either the procrastination of the war, or any cause

for reviving it."

 
Apparent, even whilst Agricola spoke, was the ardour of the soldiers, mighty

their transport and applause at the end of his speech, and instantly they flew

to their arms. Thus inflamed and urging to engage, he formed them so that

the strong band of auxiliary foot, who were eight thousand men, composed

the centre. The wings were environed with three thousand horse. The legions

without advancing stood embattled just without the entrenchment; for that

mighty would be the glory of the victory, were it, by sparing them, gained

without  spilling  any  Roman  blood;  and  they  were  still  a  sure  stay  and

succour, should the rest be repulsed. The British host was ranged upon the

rising grounds, at once for show and terror, in such sort that the first band

stood upon the plain, and the rest rose successively upon the brows of the

hills, one rank close above another, as if they had been linked together. Their

cavalry and chariots of war filled the interjacent field with great tumult and

boundings to and fro. Agricola then, fearing from the surpassing multitude of

the enemy, that he might be beset at once in the front and on each flank,

opened and extended his host. Yet, though thence his ranks must prove more

relaxed,  and  many  advised  him  to  bring  on  the  legions,  he,  who  rather

entertained a spirit of hope, and in all difficulties was ever firm, dismissed his

horse and advanced on foot before the banners.

 
In the beginning of the onset the conflict was maintained at a distance. The

Britons, they who were possessed at once of bravery and skill, armed with

their huge swords and small bucklers, quite eluded our missive weapons, or

beat them quite off, whilst of their own they poured a torrent upon us, till

Agricola encouraged three Batavian cohorts and two of the Tungrians, to

close with the enemy and bring them to an engagement hand to hand; as what

was with those veteran soldiers a long practice, and become familiar, but to

the enemy very uneasy and embarrassing, as they were armed with very little

targets and with swords of enormous size. For, the swords of the Britons,

which are blunt at the end, are unfit for grapling and cannot support a close

encounter. Hence the Batavians thickened their blows, wounded them with

the iron bosses of their bucklers, mangled their faces, and, bearing down allwho withstood them upon the plain, were already carrying the attack up to

the  hills:  insomuch  that  the  rest  of  the  cohorts,  incited  by  emulation  and

sudden  ardour,  joined  with  those  and  made  havoc  of  all  whom  they

encountered. Nay, such was the impetuosity and hurry of the victory, that

many were left behind but half dead, others not so much as wounded. In the

meantime their troops of cavalry took to flight: the chariots of war mingled

with the battalions of foot; and though they had so lately struck terror, were

now themselves beset and entangled with our thick bands, as also with the

unevenness and intricacy of the place. Of a combat of cavalry this bore not

the  least  appearance:  since  here,  standing  obstinately  foot  to  foot,  they

pressed to overthrow each other by the weight and bodies of their horses.

Moreover the war- chariots, now abandoned and straggling, as also the horses

destitute of managers and thence wild and affrighted, were running hither and

thither just as the next fright drove them; insomuch that all of their own side,

who met them or crossed their way, were beaten down by them.

 
Now those of the Britons who were lodged upon the ridges of the hills and

had  hitherto  no  share  in  the  encounter,  like  men  yet  pressed  by  no  peril

looked  with  scorn  upon  our  forces  as  but  few  in  number,  and  began  to

descend softly and to surround them in the rear, whilst they were urging their

victory. But Agricola, who had apprehended this very design, despatched to

engage them four squadrons of horse, such as he had reserved near him for

the sudden exigencies of the field; and by this providence of his, the more

furiously they had advanced, the more keenly were they repulsed and utterly

routed. Thus against the Britons themselves their own devices were turned;

and by the order of the General, the squadrons of cavalry which charged in

front, wheeled about and assailed the enemy behind. Then in truth, all over

the open fields was to be seen a spectacle prodigious and tragical, incessant

pursuits, wounds and captivity, and the present captives always slaughtered,

as often as others occurred to be taken. Now the enemy behaved just as they

happened to be prompted by their several humours. Sometimes they fled in

large troops with all their arms, before a smaller number that pursued them:

others,  quite  unarmed,  rushed  into  peril,  and  desperately  presented

themselves to instant death. On all sides lay scattered arms and carcasses, and

mangled limbs, and the ground was dyed with blood. Nay, now and then even

by the vanquished was exerted notable wrath and bravery. When once they

drew near the woods, they rejoined and rallied, and thus circumvented theforemost pursuers, such as, without knowing the country, had rashly ventured

too far. Whence we must have suffered some notable disaster, from such

confidence void of caution, had not Agricola who was assiduously visiting

every  quarter,  ordered  the  stoutest  cohorts  lightly  equipped  to  range

themselves in the form of a toil [Footnote: A net or web, to encompass them;

such as Herodotus describes, for clearing out a vanquished enemy.] to invest

them, also some of the cavalry to dismount, and enter the strait passes, and

the rest of the horse, at the same time, to beat the more open and passable

parts of the woods. Now, as soon as they perceived our forces to continue the

pursuit with ranks regular and close, they betook themselves to open flight, in

no united bands as before, no one man regarding or awaiting another; but

quite scattered, and each shunning any companion, they all made to places far

remote  and  desert.  What  ended  the  pursuit  was  night  and  a  satiety  of

slaughter. Of the enemy were slain ten thousand. There fell of our men three

hundred and forty, amongst these Aulus Atticus, commander of a cohort; one

by his own youthful heart, as also by a fiery horse, hurried into the midst of

the enemies.

 
It was indeed a night of great joy to the conquerors, both from victory and

spoil. The Britons, who wandered in despair, men and women uttering in

concert their dismal wailings, dragged along their wounded, called to such as

were unhurt, deserted their houses, nay, in rage even set them on fire; made

choice of lurking holes, then instantly forsook them; then met to consult, and

from their counsels gathered some hope: sometimes, upon beholding their

dearest  pledges  of  nature,  their  spirits  became  utterly  sunk  and  dejected;

sometimes, by the same sight, they were roused into resolution and fury. Nay,

'tis very certain, that some murdered their children and wives, as an act of

compassion and tenderness. The next day produced a more ample display of

the victory; on all sides a profound silence, solitary hills, thick smoke rising

from the houses on fire, and not a living soul to be found by the scouts. When

from  these,  who  had  been  despatched  out  every  way,  it  was  learnt,  that

whither the enemy had fled no certain traces could be discovered, and that

they had nowhere rallied in bodies; when the summer was likewise passed

and thence an impossibility of extending the operations of war, he conducted

his  army  into  the  borders  of  the  Horestians.  After  he  had  there  received

hostages, he ordered the Admiral of the Fleet to sail round Britain. For this

expedition he was furnished with proper forces, and before him was alreadygone forth the terror of the Roman power: he himself the while led on his foot

and horse with a slow pace, that thus the minds of these new nations might be

awed and dismayed even by prolonging his march through them: he then

lodged his army in garrisons for the winter. The fleet too having found a

favourable  sea,  entered  with  great  fame,  into  the  harbour  of  Rhutupium:

[Footnote: Supposed to be Sandwich Haven.] for, from thence it had sailed,

and coasting along the nethermost shore of Britain, thither returned.

 
With this course and situation of things Agricola by letters acquainted the

Emperor; tidings which, however modestly recounted, without all ostentation,

or any pomp of words, Domitian received as with joy in his countenance, so

with anguish in his soul: such was his custom. His heart indeed smote him for

his late mock triumph over the Germans, which he knew to be held in public

derision; as to adorn it he had purchased a number of slaves, who were so

decked in their habits and hair, as to resemble captives in war. But here a

victory mighty and certain, gained by the slaughter of so many thousands of

the enemy, was universally sounded by the voice of fame, and received with

vast applause. Terrible above all things it was to him, that the name of a

private man should be exalted above that of the Prince. In vain had he driven

from the public tribunals all pursuits of popular evidence and fame, in vain

smothered the lustre of every civil accomplishment, if any other than himself

possessed the glory of excelling in war: nay, however he might dissemble

every other distaste, yet to the person of the Emperor properly appertained

the virtue and praise of being a great General. Tortured with these anxious

thoughts,  and  indulging  his  humour  of  being  shut  up  in  secret,  a  certain

indication that he was fostering some sanguinary purpose, he at last judged it

the best course, upon this occasion, to hide and reserve his rancour till the

first flights of fame were passed, and the affection of the army cooled. For,

Agricola held yet the administration of Britain.

 
To him therefore he caused to be decreed in Senate the triumphal ornaments,

a statue crowned with laurel, with whatever else is bestowed instead of a real

triumph, and heightened this his compliment with many expressions full of

esteem and honour. He directed moreover a general expectation to be raised,

that  to  Agricola  was  destined  the  Province  of  Syria,  a  Government  then

vacant by the death of Atilius Rufus, a man of Consular quality, since the

same was reserved only for men of illustrious rank. Many there were who

believed, that an Imperial freedman, one much trusted with the secret designsof  his  master,  was  by  him  despatched  to  carry  the  instrument  appointing

Agricola Governor of Syria, with orders to deliver it to him, were he still in

Britain; that the freedman met Agricola crossing the Channel, and without

once speaking to him, returned directly to Domitian. It is uncertain whether

this account be true, or only a fiction framed in conformity to the character

and genius of the Prince. To his successor, in the meantime, Agricola had

surrendered the Province now settled in perfect peace and security. Moreover,

to prevent all remarks upon the manner of his entry into Rome, from any

popular distinction paid him, and any concourse of people to meet him, he

utterly declined this observance of his friends, and came into the city by

night; and by night, as he was directed, went to the palace. He was there

received by the Emperor, with a short embrace, but without a word said; then

passed, undistinguished, amongst the crowd of servile courtiers. Now in order

to soften with other and different virtues the reputation of a military man, a

name ever distasteful to those who live themselves in idleness, he resigned

himself entirely to indolence and repose. In his dress he was modest; in his

conversation courteous and free, and never found accompanied with more

than one or two of his friends. Insomuch that many, such especially as are

wont to judge of great men by their retinue and parade, all calculated to gain

popular admiration, when they had beheld and observed Agricola, sought to

know whence proceeded his mighty fame: there were indeed but few who

could account for the motives of his conduct.

 
Frequently, during the course of that time, was he accused in his absence

before Domitian, and in his absence also acquitted. What threatened his life

was no crime of his, nor complaint of any particular for injuries received, nor

aught  else  save  the  glorious  character  of  the  man,  and  the  spirit  of  the

Emperor  hating  all  excellence  and  every  virtue.  With  these  causes  there

concurred the most mischievous sort of all enemies, they who extolled him in

order  to  destroy  him.  Moreover  in  the  Commonwealth  there  ensued  such

times as would not permit the name of Agricola to remain unmentioned: so

many were the armies which we had lost in Moesia, in Dacia, in Germany, in

Pannonia;  all  by  the  wretched  conduct  of  our  Generals,  either  altogether

impotent or foolhardy: so many withal were the brave officers, with so many

bands of men overthrown and taken. Neither was the question and contest

now about maintaining the limits of the Empire and guarding the rivers which

served for its boundaries, but about defending the standing encampments ofthe legions and preserving our own territories. Thus, when public misfortunes

were following one another in a continual train, when every year was become

signal for calamities and slaughters, Agricola was by the common voice of

the populace required for the command of our armies. For, all men were

comparing his vigour, his firmness, and his mind trained in war, with the

sloth and timidity of the others. With discourses of this strain, it is certain that

even the ears of Domitian himself were teased; whilst all the best of his

freedmen advised and pressed him to this choice, out of pure affection and

duty, as did the worst out of virulence and envy; and to whatever appeared

most malignant that Prince was ever prone. In this manner was Agricola, as

well  through  his  own  virtues  as  through  the  base  management  of  others,

pushed upon a precipice even of glory.

 
A.D. 90. The year was now arrived when to the lot of Agricola was to fall the

Proconsulship of Asia or of Africa: and, as Civica had been lately murdered

(even  whilst  Proconsul  of  the  former  Province),  Agricola  was  neither

unprepared  what  course  to  pursue,  nor  Domitian  unfurnished  with  an

example to follow. It happened too, that certain persons, men apprised of the

secret purposes of the Prince, made it their business to accost Agricola and

ask him, whether he meant in earnest to take possession of his Province. Nay,

they began, at first indeed with some reserve, to extol a life of tranquillity and

repose; anon they proffered their good offices to procure his demission and

excuse: at last, throwing off all disguise, and proceeding at once to dissuade

and to intimidate him, they prevailed with him to be carried, with this as his

suit,  to  Domitian.  He,  already  prepared  to  dissemble  his  sentiments,  and

assuming a mien of haughtiness, not only received the petition of Agricola to

be excused, but when he had granted it, suffered himself to be presented with

formal thanks, Nor was he ashamed of conferring a grace so unpopular and

odious. To Agricola however he gave not the salary which was wont to be

paid to Proconsuls, and which he himself had continued to some. Whether he

were affronted that it was not asked, or whether restrained by his own guilty

mind,  lest  he  might  seem  to  have  purchased  with  money  what  he  had

hindered  by  his  interposition  and  power.  It  is  the  nature  of  men,  that

whomsoever they injure they hate. Now Domitian was in his temper apt to be

suddenly  transported  into  rage,  and,  in  proportion  as  he  smothered  his

vengeance, the more irreconcilable he always certainly proved. Yet by the

prudence and moderation of Agricola, he was softened. For, by no contumacyof his, nor by any vain ostentation of a spirit of liberty ill-timed, did he court

fame or urge his fate. Let such who are wont to admire things daring and

forbidden, know, that even under evil Princes great men may be produced,

and  that  by  the  means  of  modesty  and  observance,  provided  these  be

accompanied with application and vigour, they may rise to an equal measure

of public estimation and praise with that of many, who through a conduct

very stubborn and precipitate, but of no advantage to the Commonweal, have

distinguished themselves by dying only to gain a great name.

 
A.D. 93. Afflicting to us his family proved the end of his life, sorrowful to his

friends; and even to foreigners and such as knew him not, matter of trouble

and condolence. The commonalty likewise, and such people as were void of

employment, [Footnote: Or it may be thus translated: "The body of the people

though  chiefly  intent  upon  such  affairs  as  concerned  not  the  State."—

GORDON.  Burnouf  is  better:  "Ce  peuple,  qu'occupent  d'autres  intérêts."]

were not only frequent in their visits to his house, but in all public places, in

all particular companies made him the subject of their conversation. Nor,

when his death was divulged, was there a soul found who either rejoiced at it,

or  presently  forgot  it.  What  heightened  the  public  commiseration  and

concern, was a prevailing rumour that he was despatched by poison. That

there was any proof of this, I dare not aver. Yet it is true, that during the

whole course of his illness, Domitian caused frequent visits to be made him,

indeed  much  more  frequent  than  Princes  are  wont  to  make,  both  by  his

favourite freedmen and most trusty physicians; whether through real concern

for his health, or solicitude to learn the probability of his death. It is well

known  that  on  the  day  in  which  he  expired,  continual  accounts  were,  by

messengers purposely placed, every instant transmitted to the Emperor, how

fast  his  end  was  approaching;  and  no  one  believed,  that  he  would  thus

quicken such tidings, had he been to feel any sorrow from hearing them. In

his face however and even in his spirit, he affected to show some guise of

grief; for, he was now secure against the object of his hate, and could more

easily  dissemble  his  present  joy,  than  lately  his  fear.  It  was  abundantly

notorious how much it rejoiced him, upon reading the last will of Agricola, to

find himself left joint heir with his excellent wife and tender daughter. This

he took to have been done out of judgment and choice, and in pure honour to

himself. So blind and corrupt was his mind rendered by continual flattery, as

not to know, that to no Prince but a bad one will any good father bequeath hisfortune.

 
Agricola was born on the 13th of June, during the third Consulship of the

Emperor Caligula. He died on the 24th of August, during the Consulship of

Collega and Priscus, in the fifty-sixth year of his age. If posterity be desirous

to know his make and stature; in his person he was rather genteel and regular

than tall. [Footnote: Decentior quam sublimior fuit.] In his aspect there was

nothing terrible. His looks were extremely graceful and pleasing. A good man

you would have readily believed him, and been glad to have found that he

was a great man. Nay, though he was snatched away whilst his age was yet in

full vigour, if however his life be measured by his glory, he attained to a

mighty length of days. For, every true felicity and acquisition, namely, all

such as arise from virtue, he had already enjoyed to the full. As he had been

likewise dignified with the Consular and triumphal honours, what more could

fortune add to his lustre and renown? After enormous wealth he sought not:

an  honourable  share  he  possessed.  As  behind  him  he  left  surviving  his

daughter  and  his  wife,  he  may  be  even  accounted  happy;  since  by  dying

whilst  his  credit  was  nowise  impaired,  his  fame  in  its  full  splendour,  his

relations and friends yet in a state of security, he escaped the evils to come.

For, as before us he was wont to express his wishes, that he might survive to

see this truly blessed Age, and Trajan swaying the sovereignty, wishes which

he uttered with presages as of what would surely ensue; so it was a wondrous

consolation attending the quickness of his death, that thence he evaded the

misery  of  the  latter  times,  when  Domitian,  who  had  ceased  to  exert  his

tyranny  by  starts  only  and  intermissions,  was  come  now  to  rend  the

Commonwealth by cruelties without all respite, and to overthrow it as it were

by one great and deadly stroke.

 
For,  Agricola  saw  not  the  Court  of  the  Senate  besieged,  nor  the  Senate

enclosed  by  armed  men,  nor  the  butchery  of  so  many  men  of  Consular

dignity, nor the flight and exile of so many ladies of the prime nobility, all

effected in one continued havoc. Till then Carus Metius, the accuser, was

only considerable for having been victorious in one bloody process; till then

the  cruel  motions  of  Messallinus  rang  only  within  the  palace  at  Alba;

[Footnote: A country palace of Domitian.] and in those days Massa Bebius

(afterwards so exercised in arraigning the innocent) was himself arraigned as

a criminal. Presently after we, with our own hands, dragged Helvidius to

prison  and  execution:  we  beheld  the  melancholy  doom  of  Mauricus  andRusticus: we found ourselves besprinkled with the innocent blood of Senecio.

Even  Nero  withheld  his  eyes  from  scenes  of  cruelty,  he  indeed  ordered

murders to be perpetrated, but saw not the perpetration. The principal part of

our miseries under Domitian, was to be obliged to see him and be seen by

him, at a time when all our sighs and sorrows were watched and marked

down for condemnation; when that cruel countenance of his, always covered

with  a  settled  red,  whence  he  hardened  himself  against  all  shame  and

blushing,  served  him  to  mark  and  recount  all  the  pale  horrors  at  once

possessing so many men. Thou therefore, Agricola, art happy, not only as thy

life was glorious, but as thy death was seasonable. According to the account

of such who heard thy last words, thou didst accept thy fate cheerfully and

with  firmness,  as  if  thou  thus  didst  thy  part  to  show  the  Emperor  to  be

guiltless. But to myself and thy daughter, besides the anguish of having our

father snatched from us, it proves a fresh accession of sorrow, that we had not

an opportunity to attend thee in thy sickness, to solace thy sinking spirits, to

please  ourselves  with  seeing  thee,  please  ourselves  with  embracing  thee.

Doubtless, we should have greedily received thy instructions and sayings,

and engraved them for ever upon our hearts. This is our woe, this a wound to

our spirit, that by the lot of long absence from thee thou wast already lost to

us for four years before thy death. There is no question, excellent father, but

that with whatever thy condition required thou wast honourably supplied, as

thou wast attended by thy wife, one so full of tenderness for her husband: yet

fewer tears accompanied thy course, and during thy last moments somewhat

was wanting to satisfy thine eyes.

 
If for the Manes of the just any place be found; if, as philosophers hold, great

spirits perish not with the body, pleasing be thy repose. Moreover, recall us

thy family from this our weakness in regretting thee, and from these our

effeminate wailings, to the contemplation of thy virtues, for which it were

unjust to lament or to mourn. Let us rather adorn thy memory with deathless

praises and (as far as our infirmities will allow) by pursuing and adopting thy

excellencies. This is true honour, this the natural duty incumbent upon every

near relation. This is also what I would recommend to thy daughter and thy

wife, so to reverence the memory of a father, and a husband, as to be ever

ruminating upon all his doings, upon all his sayings, and rather to adore his

immortal name, rather the image of his mind than that of his person. Not that

I mean to condemn the use of statues, such as are framed of marble or brass.But  as  the  persons  of  men  are  frail  and  perishing,  so  are  likewise  the

portraitures  of  men.  The  form  of  the  soul  is  eternal,  such  as  you  cannot

represent and preserve by the craft of hands or by materials foreign to its

nature,  nor  otherwise  than  by  a  similitude  and  conformity  of  manners.

Whatever we loved in Agricola, whatever we admired, remains, and will for

ever remain implanted in the hearts of men, through an eternity of ages, and

conveyed down in the voice of fame, in the record of things. For, many of the

great ancients, by being buried in oblivion, have thence reaped the fate of

men altogether mean and inglorious: but Agricola shall ever survive in his

history here composed and transmitted to posterity.

 A DIALOGUE CONCERNING ORATORY, OR THE CAUSES OF

                            CORRUPT ELOQUENCE.

 
 

 
I. You have often enquired of me, my good friend, Justus Fabius, how and

from what causes it has proceeded, that while ancient times display a race of

great and splendid orators, the present age, dispirited, and without any claim

to the praise of eloquence, has scarcely retained the name of an orator. By

that  appellation  we  now  distinguish  none  but  those  who  flourished  in  a

former  period.  To  the  eminent  of  the  present  day,  we  give  the  title  of

speakers, pleaders, advocates, patrons, in short, every thing but orators.

 
The enquiry is in its nature delicate; tending, if we are not able to contend

with antiquity, to impeach our genius, and if we are not willing, to arraign our

judgement. An answer to so nice a question is more than I should venture to

undertake, were I to rely altogether upon myself: but it happens, that I am

able to state the sentiments of men distinguished by their eloquence, such as

it is in modern times; having, in the early part of my life, been present at their

conversation on the very subject now before us. What I have to offer, will not

be the result of my own thinking: it is the work of memory only; a mere

recital of what fell from the most celebrated orators of their time: a set of

men, who thought with subtilty, and expressed themselves with energy and

precision; each, in his turn, assigning different but probable causes, at times

insisting on the same, and, in the course of the debate, maintaining his own

proper character, and the peculiar cast of his mind. What they said upon the

occasion, I shall relate, as nearly as may be, in the style and manner of the

several  speakers,  observing  always  the  regular  course  and  order  of  the

controversy. For a controversy it certainly was, where the speakers of the

present age did not want an advocate, who supported their cause with zeal,

and,  after  treating  antiquity  with  sufficient  freedom,  and  even  derision,

assigned the palm of eloquence to the practisers of modern times.

 
 

 
II. Curiatius Maternus gave a public reading of his tragedy of Cato. On the

following day a report prevailed, that the piece had given umbrage to the men

in  power.  The  author,  it  was  said,  had  laboured  to  display  his  favourite

character  in  the  brightest  colours;  anxious  for  the  fame  of  his  hero,  butregardless of himself. This soon became the topic of public conversation.

Maternus received a visit from Marcus Aper and Julius Secundus, both men

of genius, and the first ornaments of the forum. I was, at that time, a constant

attendant on those eminent men. I heard them, not only in their scenes of

public business, but, feeling an inclination to the same studies, I followed

them with all the ardour of youthful emulation. I was admitted to their private

parties;  I  heard  their  debates,  and  the  amusement  of  their  social  hours:  I

treasured up their wit, and their sentiments on the various topics which they

had discussed in conversation. Respected as they were, it must, however, be

acknowledged  that  they  did  not  escape  the  malignity  of  criticism.  It  was

objected  to  Secundus,  that  he  had  no  command  of  words,  no  flow  of

language;  and  to  Aper,  that  he  was  indebted  for  his  fame,  not  to  art  or

literature, but to the natural powers of a vigorous understanding. The truth is,

the style of the former was remarkable for its purity; concise, yet free and

copious;  and  the  latter  was  sufficiently  versed  in  all  branches  of  general

erudition. It might be said of him, that he despised literature, not that he

wanted it. He thought, perhaps, that, by scorning the aid of letters, and by

drawing altogether from his own fund, his fame would stand on a more solid

foundation.

 
 

 
III. We went together to pay our visit to Maternus. Upon entering his study,

we found him with the tragedy, which he had read on the preceding day,

lying before him. Secundus began: And are you then so little affected by the

censure of malignant critics, as to persist in cherishing a tragedy which has

given  so  much  offence?  Perhaps  you  are  revising  the  piece,  and,  after

retrenching certain passages, intend to send your Cato into the world, I will

not say improved, but certainly less obnoxious. There lies the poem, said

Maternus; you may, if you think proper, peruse it with all its imperfections on

its head. If Cato has omitted any thing, Thyestes, at my next reading, shall

atone for all deficiencies. I have formed the fable of a tragedy on that subject:

the plan is warm in my imagination, and, that I may give my whole time to it,

I now am eager to dispatch an edition of Cato. Marcus Aper interposed: And

are you, indeed, so enamoured of your dramatic muse, as to renounce your

oratorical character, and the honours of your profession, in order to sacrifice

your time, I think it was lately to Medea, and now to Thyestes? Your friends,

in the mean time, expect your patronage; the colonies invoke your aid, andthe municipal cities invite you to the bar. And surely the weight of so many

causes may be deemed sufficient, without this new solicitude imposed upon

you by Domitius or Cato. And must you thus waste all your time, amusing

yourself for ever with scenes of fictitious distress, and still labouring to add

to the fables of Greece the incidents and characters of the Roman story?

 
 

 
IV. The sharpness of that reproof, replied Maternus, would, perhaps, have

disconcerted me, if, by frequent repetition, it had not lost its sting. To differ

on this subject is grown familiar to us both. Poetry, it seems, is to expect no

quarter: you wage an incessant war against the followers of that pleasing art;

and I, who am charged with deserting my clients, have yet every day the

cause of poetry to defend. But we have now a fair opportunity, and I embrace

it with pleasure, since we have a person present, of ability to decide between

us; a judge, who will either lay me under an injunction to write no more

verses, or, as I rather hope, encourage me, by his authority, to renounce for

ever the dry employment of forensic causes (in which I have had my share of

drudgery), that I may, for the future, be at leisure to cultivate the sublime and

sacred eloquence of the tragic muse.

 
 

 
V. Secundus desired to be heard: I am aware, he said, that Aper may refuse

me as an umpire. Before he states his objections, let me follow the example

of  all  fair  and  upright  judges,  who,  in  particular  cases,  when  they  feel  a

partiality for one of the contending parties, desire to be excused from hearing

the  cause.  The  friendship  and  habitual  intercourse,  which  I  have  ever

cultivated with Saleius Bassus, that excellent man, and no less excellent poet,

are well known: and let me add, if poetry is to be arraigned, I know no client

that can offer such handsome bribes.

 
My business, replied Aper, is not with Saleius Bassus: let him, and all of his

description, who, without talents for the bar, devote their time to the muses,

pursue their favourite amusement without interruption. But Maternus must

not think to escape in the crowd. I single him out from the rest, and since we

are now before a competent judge, I call upon him to answer, how it happens,

that a man of his talents, formed by nature to reach the heights of manly

eloquence, can think of renouncing a profession, which not only serves tomultiply friendships, but to support them with reputation: a profession, which

enables us to conciliate the esteem of foreign nations, and (if we regard our

own interest) lays open the road to the first honours of the state; a profession,

which, besides the celebrity that it gives within the walls of Rome, spreads an

illustrious name throughout this wide extent of the empire.

 
If it be wisdom to make the ornament and happiness of life the end and aim

of our actions, what can be more advisable than to embrace an art, by which

we are enabled to protect our friends; to defend the cause of strangers; and

succour the distressed? Nor is this all: the eminent orator is a terror to his

enemies: envy and malice tremble, while they hate him. Secure in his own

strength, he knows how to ward off every danger. His own genius is his

protection; a perpetual guard, that watches him; an invincible power, that

shields him from his enemies.

 
In the calm seasons of life, the true use of oratory consists in the assistance

which  it  affords  to  our  fellow-citizens.  We  then  behold  the  triumph  of

eloquence. Have we reason to be alarmed for ourselves, the sword and breast-

plate are not a better defence in the heat of battle. It is at once a buckler to

cover yourself and a weapon to brandish against your enemy. Armed with

this,  you  may  appear  with  courage  before  the  tribunals  of  justice,  in  the

senate,  and  even  in  the  presence  of  the  prince.  We  lately  saw  Eprius

Marcellus arraigned before the fathers: in that moment, when the minds of

the whole assembly were inflamed against him, what had he to oppose to the

vehemence of his enemies, but that nervous eloquence which he possessed in

so eminent a degree? Collected in himself, and looking terror to his enemies,

he  was  more  than  a  match  for  Helvidius  Priscus;  a  man,  no  doubt,  of

consummate wisdom, but without that flow of eloquence, which springs from

practice, and that skill in argument, which is necessary to manage a public

debate. Such is the advantage of oratory: to enlarge upon it were superfluous.

My friend Maternus will not dispute the point.

 
 

 
VI.  I  proceed  to  the  pleasure  arising  from  the  exercise  of  eloquence;  a

pleasure which does not consist in the mere sensation of the moment, but is

felt through life, repeated every day, and almost every hour. For let me ask,

to a man of an ingenuous and liberal mind, who knows the relish of elegantenjoyments, what can yield such true delight, as a concourse of the most

respectable  characters  crowding  to  his  levee?  How  must  it  enhance  his

pleasure, when he reflects, that the visit is not paid to him because he is rich,

and wants an heir, or is in possession of a public office, but purely as a

compliment to superior talents, a mark of respect to a great and accomplished

orator! The rich who have no issue, and the men in high rank and power, are

his followers. Though he is still young, and probably destitute of fortune, all

concur in paying their court to solicit his patronage for themselves, or to

recommend their friends to his protection. In the most splendid fortune, in all

the dignity and pride of power, is there any thing that can equal the heartfelt

satisfaction of the able advocate, when he sees the most illustrious citizens,

men respected for their years, and flourishing in the opinion of the public, yet

paying their court to a rising genius, and, in the midst of wealth and grandeur,

fairly owning, that they still want something superior to all their possessions?

What shall be said of the attendants, that follow the young orator from the

bar, and watch his motions to his own house? With what importance does he

appear to the multitude! in the courts of judicature, with what veneration!

When he rises to speak, the audience is hushed in mute attention; every eye is

fixed  on  him  alone;  the  crowd  presses  round  him;  he  is  master  of  their

passions; they are swayed, impelled, directed, as he thinks proper. These are

the fruits of eloquence, well known to all, and palpable to every common

observer.

 
There are other pleasures more refined and secret, felt only by the initiated.

When  the  orator,  upon  some  great  occasion,  comes  with  a  well-digested

speech,  conscious  of  his  matter,  and  animated  by  his  subject,  his  breast

expands, and heaves with emotions unfelt before. In his joy there is a dignity

suited to the weight and energy of the composition which he has prepared.

Does he rise to hazard himself in a sudden debate; he is alarmed for himself,

but in that very alarm there is a mingle of pleasure, which predominates, till

distress itself becomes delightful. The mind exults in the prompt exertion of

its powers, and even glories in its rashness. The productions of genius, and

those of the field, have this resemblance: many things are sown, and brought

to maturity with toil and care; yet that, which grows from the wild vigour of

nature, has the most grateful flavour.

 
 

 VII. As to myself, if I may allude to my own feelings, the day on which I put

on the manly gown, and even the days that followed, when, as a new man at

Rome, born in a city that did not favour my pretensions, I rose in succession

to  the  offices  of  quæstor,  tribune,  and  prætor;  those  days,  I  say,  did  not

awaken  in  my  breast  such  exalted  rapture,  as  when,  in  the  course  of  my

profession, I was called forth, with such talents as have fallen to my share, to

defend the accused; to argue a question of law before the centumviri, or, in

the presence of the prince, to plead for his freedmen, and the procurators

appointed by himself. Upon those occasions I towered above all places of

profit, and all preferment; I looked down on the dignities of tribune, prætor,

and consul; I felt within myself, what neither the favour of the great, nor the

wills and codicils of the rich, can give, a vigour of mind, an inward energy,

that springs from no external cause, but is altogether your own.

 
Look through the circle of the fine arts, survey the whole compass of the

sciences, and tell me in what branch can the professors acquire a name to vie

with the celebrity of a great and powerful orator. His fame does not depend

on  the  opinion  of  thinking  men,  who  attend  to  business  and  watch  the

administration of affairs; he is applauded by the youth of Rome, at least by

such  of  them  as  are  of  a  well-turned  disposition,  and  hope  to  rise  by

honourable  means.  The  eminent  orator  is  the  model  which  every  parent

recommends to his children. Even the common people stand at gaze, as he

passes by; they pronounce his name with pleasure, and point at him as the

object  of  their  admiration.  The  provinces  resound  with  his  praise.  The

strangers, who arrive from all parts, have heard of his genius; they wish to

behold the man, and their curiosity is never at rest, till they have seen his

person, and perused his countenance.

 
 

 
VIII. I have already mentioned Eprius Marcellus and Crispus Vibius. I cite

living  examples,  in  preference  to  the  names  of  a  former  day.  Those  two

illustrious persons, I will be bold to say, are not less known in the remotest

parts of the empire, than they are at Capua, or Vercellæ, where, we are told,

they both were born. And to what is their extensive fame to be attributed?

Not  surely  to  their  immoderate  riches.  Three  hundred  thousand  sesterces

cannot give the fame of genius. Their eloquence may be said to have built up

their fortunes; and, indeed, such is the power, I might say the inspiration, ofeloquence, that in every age we have examples of men, who by their talents

raised themselves to the summit of their ambition.

 
But I waive all former instances. The two, whom I have mentioned, are not

recorded in history, nor are we to glean an imperfect knowledge of them from

tradition;  they  are  every  day  before  our  eyes.  They  have  risen  from  low

beginnings; but the more abject their origin, and the more sordid the poverty,

in which they set out, their success rises in proportion, and affords a striking

proof of what I have advanced; since it is apparent, that, without birth or

fortune, neither of them recommended by his moral character, and one of

them deformed in his person, they have, notwithstanding all disadvantages,

made themselves, for a series of years, the first men in the state. They began

their career in the forum, and, as long as they chose to pursue that road of

ambition, they flourished in the highest reputation; they are now at the head

of the commonwealth, the ministers who direct and govern, and so high in

favour with the prince, that the respect, with which he receives them, is little

short of veneration.

 
The truth is, Vespasian, now in the vale of years, but always open to the

voice of truth, clearly sees that the rest of his favourites derive all their lustre

from the favours, which his munificence has bestowed; but with Marcellus

and Crispus the case is different: they carry into the cabinet, what no prince

can give, and no subject can receive. Compared with the advantages which

those  men  possess,  what  are  family-pictures,  statues,  busts,  and  titles  of

honour? They are things of a perishable nature, yet not without their value.

Marcellus and Vibius know how to estimate them, as they do wealth and

honours;  and  wealth  and  honours  are  advantages  against  which  you  will

easily  find  men  that  declaim,  but  none  that  in  their  hearts  despise  them.

Hence it is, that in the houses of all who have distinguished themselves in the

career of eloquence, we see titles, statues, and splendid ornaments, the reward

of talents, and, at all times, the decorations of the great and powerful orator.

 
 

 
IX. But to come to the point, from which we started: poetry, to which my

friend Maternus wishes to dedicate all his time, has none of these advantages.

It confers no dignity, nor does it serve any useful purpose. It is attended with

some  pleasure,  but  it  is  the  pleasure  of  a  moment,  springing  from  vainapplause, and bringing with it no solid advantage. What I have said, and am

going to add, may probably, my good friend Maternus, be unwelcome to your

ear; and yet I must take the liberty to ask you, if Agamemnon or Jason speaks

in  your  piece  with  dignity  of  language,  what  useful  consequence  follows

from it? What client has been defended? Who confesses an obligation? In

that whole audience, who returns to his own house with a grateful heart? Our

friend Saleius Bassus is, beyond all question, a poet of eminence, or, to use a

warmer expression, he has the god within him: but who attends his levee?

who seeks his patronage, or follows in his train? Should he himself, or his

intimate friend, or his near relation, happen to be involved in a troublesome

litigation,  what  course  do  you  imagine  he  would  take?  He  would,  most

probably, apply to his friend, Secundus; or to you, Maternus; not because you

are a poet, nor yet to obtain a copy of verses from you; of those he has a

sufficient stock at home, elegant, it must be owned, and exquisite in the kind.

But after all his labour and waste of genius, what is his reward?

 
When in the course of a year, after toiling day and night, he has brought a

single poem to perfection, he is obliged to solicit his friends and exert his

interest, in order to bring together an audience, so obliging as to hear a recital

of the piece. Nor can this be done without expence. A room must be hired, a

stage or pulpit must be erected; benches must be arranged, and hand-bills

distributed throughout the city. What if the reading succeeds to the height of

his  wishes?  Pass  but  a  day  or  two,  and  the  whole  harvest  of  praise  and

admiration fades away, like a flower that withers in its bloom, and never

ripens into fruit. By the event, however flattering, he gains no friend, he

obtains no patronage, nor does a single person go away impressed with the

idea  of  an  obligation  conferred  upon  him.  The  poet  has  been  heard  with

applause;  he  has  been  received  with  acclamations;  and  he  has  enjoyed  a

short-lived transport.

 
Bassus,  it  is  true,  has  lately  received  from  Vespasian  a  present  of  fifty

thousand sesterces. Upon that occasion, we all admired the generosity of the

prince. To deserve so distinguished a proof of the sovereign's esteem is, no

doubt,  highly  honourable;  but  is  it  not  still  more  honourable,  if  your

circumstances require it, to serve yourself by your talents? to cultivate your

genius,  for  your  own  advantage?  and  to  owe  every  thing  to  your  own

industry,  indebted  to  the  bounty  of  no  man  whatever?  It  must  not  be

forgotten, that the poet, who would produce any thing truly excellent in thekind, must bid farewell to the conversation of his friends; he must renounce,

not only the pleasures of Rome, but also the duties of social life; he must

retire from the world; as the poets say, "to groves and grottos every muse's

son." In other words, he must condemn himself to a sequestered life in the

gloom of solitude.

 
 

 
X. The love of fame, it seems, is the passion that inspires the poet's genius:

but even in this respect, is he so amply paid as to rival in any degree the

professors of the persuasive arts? As to the indifferent poet, men leave him to

his own mediocrity: the real genius moves in a narrow circle. Let there be a

reading  of  a  poem  by  the  ablest  master  of  his  art:  will  the  fame  of  his

performance reach all quarters, I will not say of the empire, but of Rome

only? Among the strangers who arrive from Spain, from Asia, or from Gaul,

who enquires after Saleius Bassus? Should it happen that there is one, who

thinks, of him; his curiosity is soon satisfied; he passes on, content with a

transient view, as if he had seen a picture or a statue.

 
In what I have advanced, let me not be misunderstood: I do not mean to deter

such as are not blessed with the gift of oratory, from the practice of their

favourite art, if it serves to fill up their time, and gain a degree of reputation. I

am an admirer of eloquence; I hold it venerable, and even sacred, in all its

shapes, and every mode of composition. The pathetic of tragedy, of which

you, Maternus, are so great a master; the majesty of the epic, the gaiety of the

lyric muse; the wanton elegy, the keen iambic, and the pointed epigram; all

have their charms; and Eloquence, whatever may be the subject which she

chooses to adorn, is with me the sublimest faculty, the queen of all the arts

and sciences. But this, Maternus, is no apology for you, whose conduct is so

extraordinary,  that,  though  formed  by  nature  to  reach  the  summit  of

perfection, you choose to wander into devious paths, and rest contented with

an humble station in the vale beneath.

 
Were you a native of Greece, where to exhibit in the public games is an

honourable employment; and if the gods had bestowed upon you the force

and sinew of the athletic Nicostratus; do you imagine that I could look tamely

on, and see that amazing vigour waste itself away in nothing better than the

frivolous art of darting the javelin, or throwing the coit? To drop the allusion,I summon you from the theatre and public recitals to the business of the

forum, to the tribunals of justice, to scenes of real contention, to a conflict

worthy of your abilities. You cannot decline the challenge, for you are left

without  an  excuse.  You  cannot  say,  with  a  number  of  others,  that  the

profession of poetry is safer than that of the public orator; since you have

ventured, in a tragedy written with spirit, to display the ardour of a bold and

towering genius.

 
And for whom have you provoked so many enemies? Not for a friend; that

would have had alleviating circumstances. You undertook the cause of Cato,

and for him committed yourself. You cannot plead, by way of apology, the

duty of an advocate, or the sudden effusion of sentiment in the heat and hurry

of  an  unpremeditated  speech.  Your  plan  was  settled;  a  great  historical

personage was your hero, and you chose him, because what falls from so

distinguished a character, falls from a height that gives it additional weight. I

am aware of your answer: you will say, it was that very circumstance that

ensured  the  success  of  your  piece;  the  sentiments  were  received  with

sympathetic rapture: the room echoed with applause, and hence your fame

throughout the city of Rome. Then let us hear no more of your love of quiet

and a state of security: you have voluntarily courted danger. For myself, I am

content with controversies of a private nature, and the incidents of the present

day. If, hurried beyond the bounds of prudence, I should happen, on any

occasion, to grate the ears of men in power, the zeal of an advocate, in the

service of his client, will excuse the honest freedom of speech, and, perhaps,

be deemed a proof of integrity.

 
 

 
XI. Aper went through his argument, according to his custom, with warmth

and vehemence. He delivered the whole with a peremptory tone and an eager

eye. As soon as he finished, I am prepared, said Maternus smiling, to exhibit

a  charge  against  the  professors  of  oratory,  which  may,  perhaps,

counterbalance the praise so lavishly bestowed upon them by my friend. In

the course of what he said, I was not surprised to see him going out of his

way, to lay poor poetry prostrate at his feet. He has, indeed, shewn some

kindness to such as are not blessed with oratorical talents. He has passed an

act of indulgence in their favour, and they, it seems, are allowed to pursue

their favourite studies. For my part, I will not say that I think myself whollyunqualified for the eloquence of the bar. It may be true, that I have some kind

of talent for that profession; but the tragic muse affords superior pleasure. My

first attempt was in the reign of Nero, in opposition to the extravagant claims

of  the  prince,  and  in  defiance  of  the  domineering  spirit  of  Vatinius,  that

pernicious favourite, by whose coarse buffoonery the muses were every day

disgraced,  I  might  say,  most  impiously  prophaned.  The  portion  of  fame,

whatever it be, that I have acquired since that time, is to be attributed, not to

the  speeches  which  I  made  in  the  forum,  but  to  the  power  of  dramatic

composition. I have, therefore, resolved to take my leave of the bar for ever.

The homage of visitors, the train of attendants, and the multitude of clients,

which glitter so much in the eyes of my friend, have no attraction for me. I

regard them as I do pictures, and busts, and statues of brass; things, which

indeed are in my family, but they came unlooked for, without my stir, or so

much as a wish on my part. In my humble station, I find that innocence is a

better shield than oratory. For the last I shall have no occasion, unless I find it

necessary, on some future occasion, to exert myself in the just defence of an

injured friend.

 
 

 
XII.  But  woods,  and  groves,  and  solitary  places,  have  not  escaped  the

satyrical vein of my friend. To me they afford sensations of a pure delight. It

is  there  I  enjoy  the  pleasures  of  a  poetic  imagination;  and  among  those

pleasures it is not the least, that they are pursued far from the noise and bustle

of the world, without a client to besiege my doors, and not a criminal to

distress me with the tears of affliction. Free from those distractions, the poet

retires  to  scenes  of  solitude,  where  peace  and  innocence  reside.  In  those

haunts  of  contemplation,  he  has  his  pleasing  visions.  He  treads  on

consecrated ground. It was there that Eloquence first grew up, and there she

reared her temple. In those retreats she first adorned herself with those graces,

which have made mankind enamoured of her charms; and there she filled the

hearts of the wise and good with joy and inspiration. Oracles first spoke in

woods and sacred groves. As to the species of oratory, which practises for

lucre, or with views of ambition; that sanguinary eloquence now so much in

vogue:  it  is  of  modern  growth,  the  offspring  of  corrupt  manners,  and

degenerate times; or rather, as my friend Aper expressed it, it is a weapon in

the hands of ill-designing men.

 The early and more happy period of the world, or, as we poets call it, the

golden age, was the æra of true eloquence. Crimes and orators were then

unknown. Poetry spoke in harmonious numbers, not to varnish evil deeds, but

to praise the virtuous, and celebrate the friends of human kind. This was the

poet's  office.  The  inspired  train  enjoyed  the  highest  honours;  they  held

commerce with the gods; they partook of the ambrosial feast: they were at

once the messengers and interpreters of the supreme command. They ranked

on earth with legislators, heroes, and demigods. In that bright assembly we

find no orator, no pleader of causes. We read of Orpheus, of Linus, and, if we

choose to mount still higher, we can add the name of Apollo himself. This

may seem a flight of fancy. Aper will treat it as mere romance, and fabulous

history: but he will not deny, that the veneration paid to Homer, with the

consent  of  posterity,  is  at  least  equal  to  the  honours  obtained  by

Demosthenes.  He  must  likewise  admit,  that  the  fame  of  Sophocles  and

Euripides  is  not  confined  within  narrower  limits  than  that  of  Lysias  or

Hyperides. To come home to our own country, there are at this day more who

dispute  the  excellence  of  Cicero  than  of  Virgil.  Among  the  orations  of

Asinius or Messala, is there one that can vie with the Medea of Ovid, or the

Thyestes of Varius?

 
 

 
XIII. If we now consider the happy condition of the true poet, and that easy

commerce in which he passes his time, need we fear to compare his situation

with that of the boasted orator, who leads a life of anxiety, oppressed by

business, and overwhelmed with care? But it is said, his contention, his toil

and danger, are steps to the consulship. How much more eligible was the soft

retreat in which Virgil passed his days, loved by the prince, and honoured by

the people! To prove this the letters of Augustus are still extant; and the

people, we know, hearing in the theatre some verses of that divine poet, when

he himself was present, rose in a body, and paid him every mark of homage,

with a degree of veneration nothing short of what they usually offered to the

emperor.

 
Even in our own times, will any man say, that Secundus Pomponius, in point

of dignity or extent of fame, is inferior to Domitius Afer? But Vibius and

Marcellus have been cited as bright examples: and yet, in their elevation what

is there to be coveted? Is it to be deemed an advantage to those ministers, thatthey are feared by numbers, and live in fear themselves? They are courted for

their  favours,  and  the  men,  who  obtain  their  suit,  retire  with  ingratitude,

pleased with their success, yet hating to be obliged. Can we suppose that the

man is happy, who by his artifices has wriggled himself into favour, and yet

is  never  thought  by  his  master  sufficiently  pliant,  nor  by  the  people

sufficiently free? And after all, what is the amount of all his boasted power?

The emperor's freedmen have enjoyed the same. But as Virgil sweetly sings,

Me let the sacred muses lead to their soft retreats, their living fountains, and

melodious groves, where I may dwell remote from care, master of myself,

and under no necessity of doing every day what my heart condemns. Let me

no  more  be  seen  at  the  wrangling  bar,  a  pale  and  anxious  candidate  for

precarious fame; and let neither the tumult of visitors crowding to my levee,

nor the eager haste of officious freedmen, disturb my morning rest. Let me

live free from solicitude, a stranger to the art of promising legacies, in order

to buy the friendship of the great; and when nature shall give the signal to

retire, may I possess no more than may be safely bequeathed to such friends

as I shall think proper. At my funeral let no token of sorrow be seen, no

pompous mockery of woe. Crown me with chaplets; strew flowers on my

grave, and let my friends erect no vain memorial, to tell where my remains

are lodged.

 
 

 
XIV. Maternus finished with an air of enthusiasm, that seemed to lift him

above himself. In that moment, Vipstanius Messala entered the room. From

the attention that appeared in every countenance, he concluded that some

important business was the subject of debate. I am afraid, said he, that I break

in upon you at an unseasonable time. You have some secret to discuss, or,

perhaps, a consultation upon your hands. Far from it, replied Secundus; I

wish you had come sooner. You would have had the pleasure of hearing an

eloquent  discourse  from  our  friend  Aper,  who  has  been  endeavouring  to

persuade Maternus to dedicate all his time to the business of the bar, and to

give the whole man to his profession. The answer of Maternus would have

entertained you: he has been defending his art, and but this moment closed an

animated speech, that held more of the poetical than the oratorical character.

 
I should have been happy, replied Messala, to have heard both my friends. It

is, however, some compensation for the loss, that I find men of their talents,instead of giving all their time to the little subtleties and knotty points of the

forum, extending their views to liberal science, and those questions of taste,

which enlarge the mind, and furnish it with ideas drawn from the treasures of

polite erudition. Enquiries of this kind afford improvement not only to those

who enter into the discussion, but to all who have the happiness of being

present at the debate. It is in consequence of this refined and elegant way of

thinking, that you, Secundus, have gained so much applause, by the life of

Julius Asiaticus, with which you have lately obliged the world. From that

specimen, we are taught to expect other productions of equal beauty from the

same hand. In like manner, I see with pleasure, that our friend Aper loves to

enliven  his  imagination  with  topics  of  controversy,  and  still  lays  out  his

leisure in questions of the schools, not, indeed, in imitation of the ancient

orators, but in the true taste of our modern rhetoricians.

 
 

 
XV. I am not surprised, returned Aper, at that stroke of raillery. It is not

enough  for  Messala,  that  the  oratory  of  ancient  times  engrosses  all  his

admiration; he must have his fling at the moderns. Our talents and our studies

are sure to feel the sallies of his pleasantry. I have often heard you, my friend

Messala, in the same humour. According to you, the present age has not a

single  orator  to  boast  of,  though  your  own  eloquence,  and  that  of  your

brother,  are  sufficient  to  refute  the  charge.  But  you  assert  roundly,  and

maintain your proposition with an air of confidence. You know how high you

stand, and while in your general censure of the age you include yourself, the

smallest tincture of malignity cannot be supposed to mingle in a decision,

which denies to your own genius, what by common consent is allowed to be

your undoubted right.

 
I have as yet, replied Messala, seen no reason to make me retract my opinion;

nor do I believe, that my two friends here, or even you yourself (though you

sometimes  affect  a  different  tone),  can  seriously  maintain  the  opposite

doctrine. The decline of eloquence is too apparent. The causes which have

contributed  to  it,  merit  a  serious  enquiry.  I  shall  be  obliged  to  you,  my

friends, for a fair solution of the question. I have often reflected upon the

subject;  but  what  seems  to  others  a  full  answer,  with  me  serves  only  to

increase the difficulty. What has happened at Rome, I perceive to have been

the case in Greece. The modern orators of that country, such as the priestNicetes, and others who, like him, stun the schools of Mytelene and Ephesus,

are fallen to a greater distance from Æschines and Demosthenes, than Afer

and Africanus, or you, my friends, from Tully or Asinius Pollio.

 
 

 
XVI. You have started an important question, said Secundus, and who so able

to  discuss  it  as  yourself?  Your  talents  are  equal  to  the  difficulty;  your

acquisitions in literature are known to be extensive, and you have considered

the  subject.  I  have  no  objection,  replied  Messala:  my  ideas  are  at  your

service, upon condition that, as I go on, you will assist me with the lights of

your understanding. For two of us I can venture to answer, said Maternus:

whatever you omit, or rather, what you leave for us to glean after you, we

shall be ready to add to your observations. As to our friend Aper, you have

told us, that he is apt to differ from you upon this point, and even now I see

him preparing to give battle. He will not tamely bear to see us joined in a

league in favour of antiquity.

 
Certainly  not,  replied  Aper,  nor  shall  the  present  age,  unheard  and

undefended, be degraded by a conspiracy. But before you sound to arms, I

wish to know, who are to be reckoned among the ancients? At what point of

time do you fix your favourite æra? When you talk to me of antiquity, I carry

my view to the first ages of the world, and see before me Ulysses and Nestor,

who flourished little less than thirteen hundred years ago. Your retrospect, it

seems, goes no farther back than to Demosthenes and Hyperides; men who

lived in the times of Philip and Alexander, and indeed survived them both.

The interval, between Demosthenes and the present age, is little more than

four hundred years; a space of time, which, with a view to the duration of

human life, may be called long; but, as a portion of that immense tract of time

which includes the different ages of the world, it shrinks into nothing, and

seems to be but yesterday. For if it be true, as Cicero says in his treatise

called Hortensius, that the great and genuine year is that period in which the

heavenly bodies revolve to the station from which their source began; and if

this grand rotation of the whole planetary system requires no less than twelve

thousand nine hundred and fifty-four years of our computation, it follows that

Demosthenes,  your  boasted  ancient,  becomes  a  modern,  and  even  our

contemporary;  nay,  that  he  lived  in  the  same  year  with  ourselves;  I  had

almost said, in the same month. 
 

 
XVII. But I am in haste to pass to our Roman orators. Menenius Agrippa may

fairly be deemed an ancient. I take it, however, that he is not the person,

whom you mean to oppose to the professors of modern eloquence. The æra,

which you have in view, is that of Cicero and Cæsar; of Cælius and Calvus;

of Brutus, Asinius, and Messala. Those are the men, whom you place in the

front  of  hour  line;  but  for  what  reason  they  are  to  be  classed  with  the

ancients, and not, as I think they ought to be, with the moderns, I am still to

learn.  To  begin  with  Cicero;  he,  according  to  the  account  of  Tiro,  his

freedman, was put to death on the seventh of the ides of December, during

the consulship of Hirtius and Pansa, who, we know, were both cut off in the

course  of  the  year,  and  left  their  office  vacant  for  Augustus  and  Quintus

Pedius. Count from that time six and fifty years to complete the reign of

Augustus; three and twenty for that of Tiberius, four for Caligula, eight and

twenty for Claudius and Nero, one for Galba, Otho, and Vitellius, and finally

six from the accession of Vespasian to the present year of our felicity, we

shall have from the death of Cicero a period of about one hundred and twenty

years, which may be considered as the term allotted to the life of man. I

myself remember to have seen in Britain a soldier far advanced in years, who

averred  that  he  carried  arms  in  that  very  battle  in  which  his  countrymen

sought to drive Julius Cæsar back from their coast. If this veteran, who served

in the defence of his country against Cæsar's invasion, had been brought a

prisoner to Rome; or, if his own inclination, or any other accident in the

course of things, had conducted him thither, he might have heard, not only

Cæsar and Cicero, but even ourselves in some of our public speeches.

 
In the late public largess you will acknowledge that you saw several old men,

who assured us that they had received more than once, the like distribution

from Augustus himself. If that be so, might not those persons have heard

Corvinus and Asinius? Corvinus, we all know, lived through half the reign of

Augustus, and Asinius almost to the end. How then are we to ascertain the

just boundaries of a century? They are not to be varied at pleasure, so as to

place some orators in a remote, and others in a recent period, while people are

still living, who heard them all, and may, therefore, with good reason rank

them as contemporaries.

  

 
XVIII. From what I have said, I assume it as a clear position, that the glory,

whatever it be, that accrued to the age in which those orators lived, is not

confined to that particular period, but reaches down to the present time, and

may more properly be said to belong to us, than to Servius Galba, or to

Carbo, and others of the same or more ancient date. Of that whole race of

orators, I may freely say, that their manner cannot now be relished. Their

language is coarse, and their composition rough, uncouth, and harsh; and yet

your Calvus, your Cælius, and even your favourite Cicero, condescend to

follow that inelegant style. It were to be wished that they had not thought

such models worthy of imitation. I mean to speak my mind with freedom; but

before I proceed, it will be necessary to make a preliminary observation, and

it is this: Eloquence has no settled form: at different times it puts on a new

garb, and changes with the manners and the taste of the age. Thus we find,

that Gracchus, compared with the elder Cato, is full and copious; but, in his

turn, yields to Crassus, an orator more polished, more correct, and florid.

Cicero rises superior to both; more animated, more harmonious and sublime.

He is followed by Corvinus, who has all the softer graces; a sweet flexibility

in his style, and a curious felicity in the choice of his words. Which was the

greatest orator, is not the question.

 
The use I make of these examples, is to prove that eloquence does not always

wear  the  same  dress,  but,  even  among  your  celebrated  ancients,  has  its

different modes of persuasion. And be it remembered, that what differs is not

always the worst. Yet such is the malignity of the human mind, that what has

the sanction of antiquity is always admired; what is present, is sure to be

condemned.  Can  we  doubt  that  there  have  been  critics,  who  were  better

pleased with Appius Cæcus than with Cato? Cicero had his adversaries: it

was objected to him, that his style was redundant, turgid, never compressed,

void of precision, and destitute of Attic elegance. We all have read the letters

of  Calvus  and  Brutus  to  your  famous  orator.  In  the  course  of  that

correspondence, we plainly see what was Cicero's opinion of those eminent

men. The former appeared to him cold and languid; the latter, disjointed,

loose,  and  negligent.  On  the  other  hand,  we  know  what  they  thought  in

return: Calvus did not hesitate to say, that Cicero was diffuse luxuriant to a

fault,  and  florid  without  vigour.  Brutus,  in  express  terms,  says,  he  was

weakened into length, and wanted sinew. If you ask my opinion, each ofthem had reason on his side. I shall hereafter examine them separately. My

business at present, is not in the detail: I speak of them in general terms.

 
 

 
XIX.  The  æra  of  ancient  oratory  is,  I  think,  extended  by  its  admirers  no

farther back than the time of Cassius Severus. He, they tell us, was the first

who dared to deviate from the plain and simple style of his predecessors. I

admit the fact. He departed from the established forms, not through want of

genius,  or  of  learning,  but  guided  by  his  own  good  sense  and  superior

judgement. He saw that the public ear was formed to a new manner; and

eloquence, he knew, was to find new approaches to the heart. In the early

periods  of  the  commonwealth,  a  rough  unpolished  people  might  well  be

satisfied with the tedious length of unskilful speeches, at a time when to

make an harangue that took up the whole day, was the orator's highest praise.

The prolix exordium, wasting itself in feeble preparation; the circumstantial

narration, the ostentatious division of the argument under different heads, and

the thousand proofs and logical distinctions, with whatever else is contained

in the dry precepts of Hermagoras and Apollodorus, were in that rude period

received with universal applause. To finish the picture, if your ancient orator

could glean a little from the common places of philosophy, and interweave a

few shreds and patches with the thread of his discourse, he was extolled to

the very skies. Nor can this be matter of wonder: the maxims of the schools

had not been divulged; they came with an air of novelty. Even among the

orators themselves, there were but few who had any tincture of philosophy.

Nor had they learned the rules of art from the teachers of eloquence.

 
In the present age, the tenets of philosophy and the precepts of rhetoric are no

longer a secret. The lowest of our popular assemblies are now, I will not say

fully instructed, but certainly acquainted with the elements of literature. The

orator, by consequence, finds himself obliged to seek new avenues to the

heart, and new graces to embellish his discourse, that he may not offend

fastidious  ears,  especially  before  a  tribunal  where  the  judge  is  no  longer

bound by precedent, but determines according to his will and pleasure; not, as

formerly, observing the measure of time allowed to the advocate, but taking

upon himself to prescribe the limits. Nor is this all: the judge, at present, will

not condescend to wait till the orator, in his own way, opens his case; but, of

his own authority, reminds him of the point in question, and, if he wanders,calls him back from his digression, not without a hint that the court wishes to

dispatch.

 
 

 
XX. Who, at this time, would bear to hear an advocate introducing himself

with a tedious preface about the infirmities of his constitution? Yet that is the

threadbare exordium of Corvinus. We have five books against Verres. Who

can endure that vast redundance? Who can listen to those endless arguments

upon points of form, and cavilling exceptions, which we find in the orations

of the same celebrated advocate for Marcus Tullius and Aulus Cæcina? Our

modern  judges  are  able  to  anticipate  the  argument.  Their  quickness  goes

before the speaker. If not struck with the vivacity of his manner, the elegance

of his sentiments, and the glowing colours of his descriptions, they soon grow

weary of the flat insipid discourse. Even in the lowest class of life, there is

now a relish for rich and splendid ornament. Their taste requires the gay, the

florid, and the brilliant. The unpolished style of antiquity would now succeed

as  ill  at  the  bar,  as  the  modern  actor  who  should  attempt  to  copy  the

deportment of Roscius, or Ambivius Turpio. Even the young men who are

preparing for the career of eloquence, and, for that purpose, attend the forum

and the tribunals of justice, have now a nice discriminating taste. They expect

to have their imaginations pleased. They wish to carry home some bright

illustration, some splendid passage, that deserves to be remembered. What

has struck their fancy, they communicate to each other: and in their letters,

the glittering thought, given with sententious brevity, the poetical allusion

that  enlivened  the  discourse,  and  the  dazzling  imagery,  are  sure  to  be

transmitted  to  their  respective  colonies  and  provinces.  The  ornaments  of

poetic diction are now required, not, indeed, copied from the rude obsolete

style of Accius and Pacuvius, but embellished with the graces of Horace,

Virgil, and Lucan. The public judgement has raised a demand for harmonious

periods, and, in compliance with the taste of the age, our orators grow every

day  more  polished  and  adorned.  Let  it  not  be  said  that  what  we  gain  in

refinement,  we  lose  in  strength.  Are  the  temples,  raised  by  our  modern

architects, of a weaker structure, because they are not formed with shapeless

stones, but with the magnificence of polished marble, and decorations of the

richest gilding?

 
  
XXI. Shall I fairly own to you the impression which I generally receive from

the ancient orators? They make me laugh, or lull me to sleep. Nor is this the

case only, when I read the orations of Canutus, Arrius, Furnius, Toranius and

others of the same school, or rather, the same infirmary; an emaciated sickly

race of orators; without sinew, colour, or proportion. But what shall be said

of your admired Calvus? He, I think, has left no less than one and twenty

volumes: in the whole collection, there is not more than one or two short

orations, that can pretend to perfection in the kind. Upon this point there is no

difference of opinion. Who now reads his declamations against Asitius or

Drusus?  His  speeches  against  Vatinius  are  in  the  hands  of  the  curious,

particularly  the  second,  which  must  be  allowed  to  be  a  masterpiece.  The

language is elegant; the sentiments are striking, and the ear is satisfied with

the roundness of the periods. In this specimen we see that he had an idea of

just composition, but his genius was not equal to his judgement. The orations

of Cælius, though upon the whole defective, are not without their beauties.

Some  passages  are  highly  finished.  In  those  we  acknowledge,  the  nice

touches of modern elegance. In general, however, the coarse expression, the

halting period, and the vulgarity of the sentiments, have too much of the

leaven of antiquity.

 
If Cælius is still admired, it is not, I believe, in any of those parts that bear the

mark of a rude illiterate age. With regard to Julius Cæsar, engaged as he was

in projects of vast ambition, we may forgive him the want of that perfection

which might, otherwise, be expected from so sublime a genius. Brutus, in like

manner, may be excused on account of his philosophical speculations. Both

he and Cæsar, in their oratorical attempts, fell short of themselves. Their

warmest  admirers  acknowledge  the  fact,  nor  is  there  an  instance  to  the

contrary, unless we except Cæsar's speech for Decius the Samnite, and that of

Brutus for king Dejotarus. But are those performances, and some others of

the  same  lukewarm  temper,  to  be  received  as  works  of  genius?  He  who

admires those productions, may be left to admire their verses also. For verses

they both made, and sent them into the world, I will not say, with more

success than Cicero, but certainly more to their advantage; for their poetry

had the good fortune to be little known.

 
Asinius lived near our own times. He, seems to have studied in the old school

of Menenius and Appius. He composed tragedies as well as orations, but in astyle so harsh and ragged, that one would think him the disciple of Accius

and Pacuvius. He mistook the nature of eloquence, which may then be said to

have attained its true beauty, when the parts unite with smoothness, strength,

and proportion. As in the human body the veins should not swell too high,

nor the bones and sinews appear too prominent; but its form is then most

graceful,  when  a  pure  and  temperate  blood  gives  animation  to  the  whole

frame; when the muscles have their proper play, and the colour of health is

diffused over the several parts. I am not willing to disturb the memory of

Corvinus Messala. If he did not reach the graces of modern composition, the

defect does not seem to have sprung from choice. The vigour of his genius

was not equal to his judgement.

 
 

 
XXII. I now proceed to Cicero, who, we find, had often upon his hands the

very  controversy,  that  engages  us  at  present.  It  was  the  fashion  with  his

contemporaries to admire the ancients, while he, on the contrary, contended

for the eloquence of his own time. Were I to mention the quality that placed

him at the head of his rivals I should say it was the solidity of his judgement.

It was he that first shewed a taste for polished and graceful oratory. He was

happy  in  his  choice  of  words,  and  he  had  the  art  of  giving  weight  and

harmony to his composition. We find in many passages a warm imagination,

and luminous sentences. In his later speeches, he has lively sallies of wit and

fancy. Experience had then matured his judgement, and after long practice, he

found the true oratorical style. In his earlier productions we see the rough cast

of  antiquity.  The  exordium  is  tedious;  the  narration  is  drawn  into  length;

luxuriant passages are not retouched with care; he is not easily affected, and

he rarely takes fire; his sentiments are not always happily expressed, nor are

the periods closed with energy. There is nothing so highly finished, as to

tempt you to avail yourself of a borrowed beauty. In short, his speeches are

like a rude building, which is strong and durable, but wants that grace and

consonance of parts which give symmetry and perfection to the whole.

 
In oratory, as in architecture, I require ornament as well as use. From the man

of  ample  fortune,  who  undertakes  to  build,  we  expect  elegance  and

proportion. It is not enough that his house will keep out the wind and the rain;

it must strike the eye, and present a pleasing object. Nor will it suffice that

the  furniture  may  answer  all  domestic  purposes;  it  should  be  rich,fashionable, elegant; it should have gold and gems so curiously wrought, that

they will bear examination, often viewed, and always admired. The common

utensils, which are either mean or sordid, should be carefully removed out of

sight. In like manner, the true orator should avoid the trite and vulgar. Let

him reject the antiquated phrase, and whatever is covered with the rust of

time;  let  his  sentiments  be  expressed  with  spirit,  not  in  careless,  ill-

constructed, languid periods, like a dull writer of annals; let him banish low

scurrility, and, in short, let him know how to diversify his style, that he may

not fatigue the ear with a monotony, ending for ever with the same unvaried

cadence.

 
 

 
XXIII. I shall say nothing of the false wit, and insipid play upon words,

which we find in Cicero's orations. His pleasant conceits about the wheel of

fortune, and the arch raillery on the equivocal meaning of the word VERRES,

do not merit a moment's attention. I omit the perpetual recurrence of the

phrase,  esse  videatur,  which  chimes  in  our  ears  at  the  close  of  so  many

sentences, sounding big, but signifying nothing. These are petty blemishes; I

mention  them  with  reluctance.  I  say  nothing  of  other  defects  equally

improper: and yet those very defects are the delight of such as affect to call

themselves ancient orators. I need not single them out by name: the men are

sufficiently known; it is enough to allude, in general terms, to the whole

class.

 
We all are sensible that there is a set of critics now existing, who prefer

Lucilius to Horace, and Lucretius to Virgil; who despise the eloquence of

Aufidius Bassus and Servilius Nonianus, and yet admire Varro and Sisenna.

By these pretenders to taste, the works of our modern rhetoricians are thrown

by with neglect, and even fastidious disdain; while those of Calvus are held

in the highest esteem. We see these men prosing in their ancient style before

the judges; but we see them left without an audience, deserted by the people,

and hardly endured by their clients. The truth is, their cold and spiritless

manner has no attraction. They call it sound oratory, but it is want of vigour;

like  that  precarious  state  of  health  which  weak  constitutions  preserve  by

abstinence. What physician will pronounce that a strong habit of body, which

requires constant care and anxiety of mind? To say barely, that we are not ill,

is surely not enough. True health consists in vigour, a generous warmth, anda certain alacrity in the whole frame. He who is only not indisposed, is little

distant from actual illness.

 
With you, my friends, the case is different: proceed, as you well can, and in

fact, as you do, to adorn our age with all the grace and splendour of true

oratory. It is with pleasure, Messala, that I see you selecting for imitation the

liveliest  models  of  the  ancient  school.  You  too,  Maternus,  and  you,  my

friend,  Secundus,  you  both  possess  the  happy  art  of  adding  to  weight  of

sentiment all the dignity of language. To a copious invention you unite the

judgement that knows how to distinguish the specific qualities of different

authors. The beauty of order is yours. When the occasion demands it, you can

expand and amplify with strength and majesty; and you know when to be

concise with energy. Your periods flow with ease, and your composition has

every grace of style and sentiment. You command the passions with resistless

sway, while in yourselves you beget a temperance so truly dignified, that,

though, perhaps, envy and the malignity of the times may be unwilling to

proclaim your merit, posterity will do you ample justice.

 
 

 
XXIV. As soon as Aper concluded, You see, said Maternus, the zeal and

ardour of our friend: in the cause of the moderns, what a torrent of eloquence!

against the ancients, what a fund of invective! With great spirit, and a vast

compass of learning, he has employed against his masters the arts for which

he  is  indebted  to  them.  And  yet  all  this  vehemence  must  not  deter  you,

Messala, from the performance of your promise. A formal defence of the

ancients  is  by  no  means  necessary.  We  do  not  presume  to  vie  with  that

illustrious race. We have been praised by Aper, but we know our inferiority.

He himself is aware of it, though, in imitation of the ancient manner, he has

thought proper, for the sake of a philosophical debate, to take the wrong side

of the question. In answer to his argument, we do not desire you to expatiate

in praise of the ancients: their fame wants no addition. What we request is, an

investigation of the causes which have produced so rapid a decline from the

flourishing  state  of  genuine  eloquence.  I  call  it  rapid,  since,  according  to

Aper's own chronology, the period from the death of Cicero does not exceed

one hundred and twenty years.

 
  
XXV.  I  am  willing,  said  Messala,  to  pursue  the  plan  which  you  have

recommended.  The  question,  whether  the  men  who  flourished  above  one

hundred years ago, are to be accounted ancients, has been started by my

friend Aper, and, I believe, it is of the first impression. But it is a mere

dispute about words. The discussion of it is of no moment, provided it be

granted, whether we call them ancients, or our predecessors, or give them any

other appellation, that the eloquence of those times was superior to that of the

present age. When Aper tells us, that different periods of time have produced

new modes of oratory, I see nothing to object; nor shall I deny, that in one

and the same period the style and manners have greatly varied. But this I

assume, that among the orators of Greece, Demosthenes holds the first rank,

and  after  him  Æschynes,  Hyperides,  Lysias,  and  Lycurgus,  in  regular

succession. That age, by common consent, is allowed to be the flourishing

period of Attic eloquence.

 
In like manner, Cicero stands at the head of our Roman orators, while Calvus,

Asinius, and Cæsar, Cælius and Brutus, follow him at a distance; all of them

superior, not only to every former age, but to the whole race that came after

them. Nor is it material that they differ in the mode, since they all agree in the

kind. Calvus is close and nervous; Asinius more open and harmonious; Cæsar

is distinguished by the splendour of his diction; Cælius by a caustic severity;

and  gravity  is  the  characteristic  of  Brutus.  Cicero  is  more  luxuriant  in

amplification, and he has strength and vehemence. They all, however, agree

in this: their eloquence is manly, sound, and vigorous. Examine their works,

and you will see the energy of congenial minds, a family-likeness in their

genius, however it may take a distinct colour from the specific qualities of the

men. True, they detracted from each other's merit. In their letters, which are

still extant, we find some strokes of mutual hostility. But this littleness does

not  impeach  their  eloquence:  their  jealousy  was  the  infirmity  of  human

nature. Calvus, Asinius, and Cicero, might have their fits of animosity, and,

no doubt, were liable to envy, malice, and other degrading passions: they

were great orators, but they were men.

 
Brutus  is  the  only  one  of  the  set,  who  may  be  thought  superior  to  petty

contentions.  He  spoke  his  mind  with  freedom,  and,  I  believe,  without  a

tincture of malice. He did not envy Cæsar himself, and can it be imagined

that he envied Cicero? As to Galba, Lælius, and others of a remote period,against whom we have heard Aper's declamation, I need not undertake their

defence, since I am willing to acknowledge, that in their style and manner we

perceive those defects and blemishes which it is natural to expect, while art,

as yet in its infancy, has made no advances towards perfection.

 
 

 
XXVI. After all, if the best form of eloquence must be abandoned, and some,

new-fangled style must grow into fashion, give me the rapidity of Gracchus,

or the more solemn manner of Crassus, with all their imperfections, rather

than the effeminate delicacy of Mæcenas, or the tinkling cymbal of Gallio.

The  most  homely  dress  is  preferable  to  gawdy  colours  and  meretricious

ornaments. The style in vogue at present, is an innovation, against every thing

just and natural; it is not even manly. The luxuriant phrase, the inanity of

tuneful periods, and the wanton levity of the whole composition, are fit for

nothing but the histrionic art, as if they were written for the stage. To the

disgrace of the age (however astonishing it may appear), it is the boast, the

pride, the glory of our present orators, that their periods are musical enough

either for the dancer's heel, or the warbler's throat. Hence it is, that by a

frequent, but preposterous, metaphor, the orator is said to speak in melodious

cadence, and the dancer to move with expression. In this view of things, even

Cassius Severus (the only modern whom Aper has ventured to name), if we

compare  him  with  the  race  that  followed,  may  be  fairly  pronounced  a

legitimate orator, though it must be acknowledged, that in what remains of

his compositing, he is clumsy without strength, and violent without spirit. He

was the first that deviated from the great masters of his art. He despised all

method and regular arrangement; indelicate in his choice of words, he paid no

regard to decency; eager to attack, he left himself unguarded; he brandished

his weapons without skill or address; and, to speak plainly, he wrangled, but

did  not  argue.  And  yet,  notwithstanding  these  defects,  he  was,  as  I  have

already  said,  superior  to  all  that  came  after  him,  whether  we  regard  the

variety of his learning, the urbanity of his wit, or the vigour of his mind. I

expected that Aper, after naming this orator, would have drawn up the rest of

his forces in regular order. He has fallen, indeed, upon Asinius, Cælius, and

Calvus; but where are his champions to enter the lists with them? I imagined

that he had a phalanx in reserve, and that we should have seen them man by

man giving battle to Cicero, Cæsar, and the rest in succession. He has singled

out some of the ancients, but has brought none of his moderns into the field.He thought it enough to give them a good character in their absence. In this,

perhaps, he acted with prudence: he was afraid, if he selected a few, that the

rest of the tribe would take offence. For among the rhetoricians of the present

day, is there one to be found, who does not, in his own opinion, tower above

Cicero, though he has the modesty to yield to Gabinianus?

 
 

 
XXVII.  What  Aper  has  omitted,  I  intend  to  perform.  I  shall  produce  his

moderns by name, to the end that, by placing the example before our eyes, we

may be able, more distinctly, to trace the steps by which the vigour of ancient

eloquence has fallen to decay. Maternus interrupted him. I wish, he said, that

you would come at once to the point: we claim your promise. The superiority

of the ancients is not in question. We want no proof of it. Upon that point my

opinion  is  decided.  But  the  causes  of  our  rapid  decline  from  ancient

excellence  remain  to  be  unfolded.  We  know  that  you  have  turned  your

thoughts to this subject, and we expected from you a calm disquisition, had

not the violent attack which Aper made upon your favourite orators, roused

your  spirit,  and,  perhaps,  given  you  some  offence.  Far  from  it,  replied

Messala;  he  has  given  me  no  offence;  nor  must  you,  my  friends,  take

umbrage, if at any time a word should fall from me, not quite agreeable to

your way of thinking. We are engaged in a free enquiry, and you know, that,

in this kind of debate, the established law allows every man to speak his mind

without  reserve.  That  is  the  law,  replied  Maternus;  you  may  proceed  in

perfect security. When you speak of the ancients, speak of them with ancient

freedom,  which,  I  fear,  is  at  a  lower  ebb  than  even  the  genius  of  those

eminent men.

 
 

 
XXVIII.  Messala  resumed  his  discourse:  The  causes  of  the  decay  of

eloquence are by no means difficult to be traced. They are, I believe, well

known  to  you,  Maternus,  and  also  to  Secundus,  not  excepting  my  friend

Aper.  It  seems,  however,  that  I  am  now,  at  your  request,  to  unravel  the

business. But there is no mystery in it. We know that eloquence, with the rest

of the polite arts, has lost its former lustre: and yet, it is not a dearth of men,

or a decay of talents, that has produced this fatal effect. The true causes are,

the dissipation of our young men, the inattention of parents, the ignorance ofthose  who  pretend  to  give  instruction,  and  the  total  neglect  of  ancient

discipline. The mischief began at Rome, it has over-run all Italy, and is now,

with rapid strides, spreading through the provinces. The effects, however, are

more visible at home, and therefore I shall confine myself to the reigning

vices of the capital; vices that wither every virtue in the bud, and continue

their baleful influence through every season of life.

 
But before I enter on the subject, it will not be useless to look back to the

system of education that prevailed in former times, and to the strict discipline

of our ancestors, in a point of so much moment as the formation of youth. In

the times to which I now refer, the son of every family was the legitimate

offspring  of  a  virtuous  mother.  The  infant,  as  soon  as  born,  was  not

consigned  to  the  mean  dwelling  of  a  hireling  nurse,  but  was  reared  and

cherished in the bosom of a tender parent. To regulate all household affairs,

and  attend  to  her  infant  race,  was,  at  that  time,  the  glory  of  the  female

character. A matron, related to the family, and distinguished by the purity of

her life, was chosen to watch the progress of the tender mind. In her presence

not one indecent word was uttered; nothing was done against propriety and

good manners. The hours of study and serious employment were settled by

her direction; and not only so, but even the diversions of the children were

conducted with modest reserve and sanctity of manners. Thus it was that

Cornelia,  the  mother  of  the  Gracchi,  superintended  the  education  of  her

illustrious issue. It was thus that Aurelia trained up Julius Cæsar; and thus

Atia formed the mind of Augustus. The consequence of this regular discipline

was, that the young mind grew up in innocence, unstained by vice, unwarped

by irregular passions, and, under that culture, received the seeds of science.

Whatever was the peculiar bias, whether to the military art, the study of the

laws, or the profession of eloquence, that engrossed the whole attention, and

the  youth,  thus  directed,  embraced  the  entire  compass  of  one  favourite

science.

 
 

 
XXIX. In the present age, what is our practice? The infant is committed to a

Greek chambermaid, and a slave or two, chosen for the purpose, generally the

worst of the whole household train; all utter strangers to every liberal notion.

In  that  worshipful  society  the  youth  grows  up,  imbibing  folly  and  vulgar

error. Throughout the house, not one servant cares what he says or does in thepresence of his young master: and indeed how should it be otherwise? The

parents themselves are the first to give their children the worst examples of

vice and luxury. The stripling consequently loses all sense of shame, and

soon forgets the respect he owes to others as well as to himself. A passion for

horses, players, and gladiators, seems to be the epidemic folly of the times.

The child receives it in his mother's womb; he brings it with him into the

world; and in a mind so possessed, what room for science, or any generous

purpose?

 
In  our  houses,  at  our  tables,  sports  and  interludes  are  the  topics  of

conversation. Enter the places of academical lectures, and who talks of any

other subject? The preceptors themselves have caught the contagion. Nor can

this  be  wondered  at.  To  establish  a  strict  and  regular  discipline,  and  to

succeed  by  giving  proofs  of  their  genius,  is  not  the  plan  of  our  modern

rhetoricians.  They  pay  their  court  to  the  great,  and,  by  servile  adulation,

increase the number of their pupils. Need I mention the manner of conveying

the first elements of school learning? No care is taken to give the student a

taste for the best authors; the page of history lies neglected; the study of men

and manners is no part of their system; and every branch of useful knowledge

is left uncultivated. A preceptor is called in, and education is then thought to

be in a fair way. But I shall have occasion hereafter to speak more fully of

that class of men, called rhetoricians. It will then be seen, at what period that

profession first made its appearance at Rome, and what reception it met with

from our ancestors.

 
 

 
XXX. Before I proceed, let us advert for a moment to the plan of ancient

discipline.  The  unwearied  diligence  of  the  ancient  orators,  their  habits  of

meditation, and their daily exercise in the whole circle of arts and sciences,

are amply displayed in the books which they have transmitted to us. The

treatise of Cicero, entitled Brutus, is in all our hands. In that work, after

commemorating the orators of a former day, he closes the account with the

particulars  of  his  own  progress  in  science,  and  the  method  he  took  in

educating himself to the profession of oratory. He studied the civil law under

Mucius Scævola; he was instructed in the various systems of philosophy, by

Philo of the academic school, and by Diodorus the stoic; and though Rome, at

that time, abounded with the best professors, he made a voyage to Greece,and thence to Asia, in order to enrich his mind with every branch of learning.

Hence that store of knowledge which appears in all his writings. Geometry,

music, grammar, and every useful art, were familiar to him. He embraced the

whole science of logic and ethics. He studied the operations of nature. His

diligence of enquiry opened to him the long chain of causes and effects, and,

in short, the whole system of physiology was his own. From a mind thus

replenished, it is no wonder, my good friends, that we see in the compositions

of that extraordinary man that affluence of ideas, and that prodigious flow of

eloquence. In fact, it is not with oratory as with the other arts, which are

confined  to  certain  objects,  and  circumscribed  within  their  own  peculiar

limits. He alone deserves the name of an orator, who can speak in a copious

style, with ease or dignity, as the subject requires; who can find language to

decorate  his  argument;  who  through  the  passions  can  command  the

understanding;  and,  while  he  serves  mankind,  knows  how  to  delight  the

judgement and the imagination of his audience.

 
 

 
XXXI.  Such  was,  in  ancient  times,  the  idea  of  an  orator.  To  form  that

illustrious character, it was not thought necessary to declaim in the schools of

rhetoricians, or to make a vain parade in fictitious controversies, which were

not  only  void  of  all  reality,  but  even  of  a  shadow  of  probability.  Our

ancestors pursued a different plan: they stored their minds with just ideas of

moral good and evil; with the rules of right and wrong, and the fair and foul

in human transactions. These, on every controverted point, are the orator's

province. In courts of law, just and unjust undergo his discussion; in political

debate, between what is expedient and honourable, it is his to draw the line;

and those questions are so blended in their nature, that they enter into every

cause. On such important topics, who can hope to bring variety of matter, and

to dignify that matter with style and sentiment, if he has not, beforehand,

enlarged his mind with the knowledge of human nature? with the laws of

moral obligation? the deformity of vice, the beauty of virtue, and other points

which do not immediately belong to the theory of ethics?

 
The orator, who has enriched his mind with these materials, may be truly said

to  have  acquired  the  powers  of  persuasion.  He  who  knows  the  nature  of

indignation, will be able to kindle or allay that passion in the breast of the

judge; and the advocate who has considered the effect of compassion, andfrom what secret springs it flows, will best know how to soften the mind, and

melt it into tenderness. It is by these secrets of his art that the orator gains his

influence. Whether he has to do with the prejudiced, the angry, the envious,

the melancholy, or the timid, he can bridle their various passions, and hold

the reins in his own hand. According to the disposition of his audience, he

will know when to check the workings of the heart, and when to raise them to

their full tumult of emotion.

 
Some critics are chiefly pleased with that close mode of oratory, which in a

laconic manner states the facts, and forms an immediate conclusion: in that

case, it is obvious how necessary it is to be a complete master of the rules of

logic.  Others  delight  in  a  more  open,  free,  and  copious  style,  where  the

arguments are drawn from topics of general knowledge; for this purpose, the

peripatetic school will supply the orator with ample materials. The academic

philosopher will inspire him with warmth and energy; Plato will give the

sublime,  and  Xenophon  that  equal  flow  which  charms  us  in  that  amiable

writer. The rhetorical figure, which is called exclamation, so frequent with

Epicurus and Metrodorus, will add to a discourse those sudden breaks of

passion, which give motion, strength, and vehemence.

 
It is not for the stoic school, nor for their imaginary wise man, that I am

laying down rules. I am forming an orator, whose business it is, not to adhere

to one sect, but to go the round of all the arts and sciences. Accordingly we

find, that the great master of ancient eloquence laid their foundation in a

thorough study of the civil law, and to that fund they added grammar, music,

and geometry. The fact is, in most of the causes that occur, perhaps in every

cause,  a  due  knowledge  of  the  whole  system  of  jurisprudence  is  an

indispensable  requisite.  There  are  likewise  many  subjects  of  litigation,  in

which an acquaintance with other sciences is of the highest use.

 
 

 
XXXII. Am I to be told, that to gain some slight information on particular

subjects, as occasion may require, will sufficiently answer the purposes of an

orator? In answer to this, let it be observed, that the application of what we

draw from our own fund, is very different from the use we make of what we

borrow. Whether we speak from digested knowledge, or the mere suggestion

of others, the effect is soon perceived. Add to this, that conflux of ideas withwhich  the  different  sciences  enrich  the  mind,  gives  an  air  of  dignity  to

whatever  we  say,  even  in  cases  where  that  depth  of  knowledge  is  not

required.  Science  adorns  the  speaker  at  all  times,  and,  where  it  is  least

expected, confers a grace that charms every hearer; the man of erudition feels

it, and the unlettered part of the audience acknowledge the effect without

knowing the cause. A murmur of applause ensues; the speaker is allowed to

have laid in a store of knowledge; he possesses all the powers of persuasion,

and then is called an orator indeed.

 
I take the liberty to add, if we aspire to that honourable appellation, that there

is no way but that which I have chalked out. No man was ever yet a complete

orator, and, I affirm, never can be, unless, like the soldier marching to the

field of battle, he enters the forum armed at all points with the sciences and

the liberal arts. Is that the case in these our modern times? The style which

we  hear  every  day,  abounds  with  colloquial  barbarisms,  and  vulgar

phraseology:  no  knowledge  of  the  laws  is  heard;  our  municipal  policy  is

wholly  neglected,  and  even  the  decrees  of  the  senate  are  treated  with

contempt and derision. Moral philosophy is discarded, and the maxims of

ancient wisdom are unworthy of their notice. In this manner, eloquence is

dethroned; she is banished from her rightful dominions, and obliged to dwell

in the cold regions of antithesis, forced conceit, and pointed sentences. The

consequence  is,  that  she,  who  was  once  the  sovereign  mistress  of  the

sciences, and led them as handmaids in her train, is now deprived of her

attendants,  reduced,  impoverished,  and,  stripped  of  her  usual  honours  (I

might say of her genius), compelled to exercise a mere plebeian art.

 
And now, my friends, I think I have laid open the efficient cause of the

decline of eloquence. Need I call witnesses to support my opinion? I name

Demosthenes among the Greeks. He, we are assured, constantly attended the

lectures of Plato. I name Cicero among the Romans: he tells us (I believe I

can repeat his words), that if he attained any degree of excellence, he owed it,

not so much to the precepts of rhetoricians, as to his meditations in the walks

of  the  academic  school.  I  am  aware  that  other  causes  of  our  present

degeneracy may be added; but that task I leave to my friends, since I now

may flatter myself that I have performed my promise. In doing it, I fear, that,

as often happens to me, I have incurred the danger of giving offence. Were a

certain class of men to hear the principles which I have advanced in favour of

legal knowledge and sound philosophy, I should expect to be told that I havebeen all the time commending my own visionary schemes.

 
 

 
XXXIII. You will excuse me, replied Maternus, if I take the liberty to say

that you have by no means finished your part of our enquiry. You seem to

have spread your canvas, and to have touched the outlines of your plan; but

there are other parts that still require the colouring of so masterly a hand. The

stores of knowledge, with which the ancients enlarged their minds, you have

fairly explained, and, in contrast to that pleasing picture, you have given us a

true draught of modern ignorance. But we now wish to know, what were the

exercises,  and  what  the  discipline,  by  which  the  youth  of  former  times

prepared themselves for the honours of their profession. It will not, I believe,

be contended, that theory, and systems of art, are of themselves sufficient to

form a genuine orator. It is by practice, and by constant exertion, that the

faculty of speech improves, till the genius of the man expands, and flourishes

in its full vigour. This, I think, you will not deny, and my two friends, if I

may  judge  by  their  looks,  seem  to  give  their  assent.  Aper  and  Secundus

agreed without hesitation.

 
Messala proceeded as follows: Having, as I conceive, shewn the seed-plots of

ancient eloquence, and the fountains of science, from which they drew such

copious  streams;  it  remains  now  to  give  some  idea  of  the  labour,  the

assiduity,  and  the  exercises,  by  which  they  trained  themselves  to  their

profession. I need not observe, that in the pursuit of science, method and

constant  exercise  are  indispensable:  for  who  can  hope,  without  regular

attention, to master abstract schemes of philosophy, and embrace the whole

compass of the sciences? Knowledge must be grafted in the mind by frequent

meditation; to that must be added the faculty of conveying our ideas; and, to

make sure of our impression, we must be able to adorn our thoughts with the

colours of true eloquence. Hence it is evident that the same arts, by which the

mind lays in its stock of knowledge, must be still pursued, in order to attain a

clear and graceful manner of conveying that knowledge to others. This may

be thought refined and too abstruse. If, however, we are still to be told that

science and elocution are things in themselves distinct and unrelated; this, at

least, may be assumed, that he, who, with a fund of previous knowledge,

undertakes the province of oratory, will bring with him a mind well seasoned,

and duly prepared for the study and exercise of real eloquence. 
 

 
XXXIV.  The  practice  of  our  ancestors  was  agreeable  to  this  theory.  The

youth, who was intended for public declamation, went forth, under the care of

his father, or some near relation, with all the advantages of home-discipline;

his mind was expanded by the fine arts, and impregnated with science. He

was conducted to the most eminent orator of the time. Under that illustrious

patronage he visited the forum; he attended his patron upon all occasions; he

listened with attention to his pleadings in the tribunals of justice, and his

public harangues before the people; he heard him in the warmth of argument;

he noted his sudden replies, and thus, in the field of battle, if I may so express

myself, he learned the first rudiments of rhetorical warfare. The advantages

of  this  method  are  obvious:  the  young  candidate  gained  courage,  and

improved  his  judgement;  he  studied  in  open  day,  amidst  the  heat  of  the

conflict,  where  nothing  weak  or  idle  could  be  said  with  impunity;  where

every thing absurd was instantly rebuked by the judge, exposed to ridicule by

the adversary, and condemned by the whole bar.

 
In this manner the student was initiated in the rules of sound and manly

eloquence; and, though it be true, that he placed himself under the auspices of

one orator only, he heard the rest in their turn, and in that diversity of tastes

which always prevails in mixed assemblies, he was enabled to distinguish

what was excellent or defective in the kind. The orator in actual business was

the best preceptor: the instructions which he gave, were living eloquence, the

substance, and not the shadow. He was himself a real combatant, engaged

with a zealous antagonist, both in earnest, and not like gladiators, in a mock

contest, fighting for prizes. It was a struggle for victory, before an audience

always changing, yet always full; where the speaker had his enemies as well

as his admirers; and between both, what was brilliant met with applause;

what was defective, was sure to be condemned. In this clash of opinions, the

genuine  orator  flourished,  and  acquired  that  lasting  fame,  which,  we  all

know, does not depend on the voice of friends only, but must rebound from

the benches filled with your enemies. Extorted applause is the best suffrage.

 
In that school, the youth of expectation, such as I have delineated, was reared

and educated by the most eminent genius of the times. In the forum, he was

enlightened by the experience of others; he was instructed in the knowledgeof the laws, accustomed to the eye of the judges, habituated to the looks of a

numerous  audience,  and  acquainted  with  the  popular  taste.  After  this

preparation, he was called forth to conduct a prosecution, or to take upon

himself the whole weight of the defence. The fruit of his application was then

seen at once. He was equal, in his first outset, to the most arduous business.

Thus it was that Crassus, at the age of nineteen, stood forth the accuser of

Papirius Carbo: thus Julius Cæsar, at one and twenty, arraigned Dolabella;

Asinius Pollio, about the same age, attacked Caius Cato; and Calvus, but a

little  older,  flamed  out  against  Vatinius.  Their  several  speeches  are  still

extant, and we all read them with admiration.

 
 

 
XXXV.  In  opposition  to  this  system  of  education,  what  is  our  modern

practice? Our young men are led to academical prolusions in the school of

vain professors, who call themselves rhetoricians; a race of impostors, who

made their first appearance at Rome, not long before the days of Cicero. That

they were unwelcome visitors, is evident from the circumstance of their being

silenced by the two censors, Crassus and Domitius. They were ordered, says

Cicero, to shut up their school of impudence. Those scenes, however, are

open at present, and there our young students listen to mountebank oratory. I

am at a loss how to determine which is most fatal to all true genius, the place

itself, the company that frequent it, or the plan of study universally adopted.

Can the place impress the mind with awe and respect, where none are ever

seen but the raw, the unskilful, and the ignorant? In such an assembly what

advantage  can  arise?  Boys  harangue  before  boys,  and  young  men  exhibit

before their fellows. The speaker is pleased with his declamation, and the

hearer with his judgement. The very subjects on which they display their

talents,  tend  to  no  useful  purpose.  They  are  of  two  sorts,  persuasive  or

controversial.  The  first,  supposed  to  be  of  the  lighter  kind,  are  usually

assigned to the youngest scholars: the last are reserved for students of longer

practice  and  riper  judgement.  But,  gracious  powers!  what  are  the

compositions produced on these occasions?

 
The subject is remote from truth, and even probability, unlike any thing that

ever happened in human life: and no wonder if the superstructure perfectly

agrees  with  the  foundation.  It  is  to  these  scenic  exercises  that  we  owe  a

number of frivolous topics, such as the reward due to the slayer of a tyrant;the election to be made by violated virgins; the rites and ceremonies proper to

be used during a raging pestilence; the loose behaviour of married women;

with other fictitious subjects, hackneyed in the schools, and seldom or never

heard of in our courts of justice. These imaginary questions are treated with

gaudy flourishes, and all the tumor of unnatural language. But after all this

mighty parade, call these striplings from their schools of rhetoric, into the

presence of the judges, and to the real business of the bar:

 
 

 
1. What figure will they make before that solemn judicature? Trained up in

chimerical exercises, strangers to the municipal laws, unacquainted with the

principles of natural justice and the rights of nations, they will bring with

them that false taste which they have been for years acquiring, but nothing

worthy of the public ear, nothing useful to their clients. They have succeeded

in nothing but the art of making themselves ridiculous. The peculiar quality

of the teacher, whatever it be, is sure to transfuse itself into the performance

of the pupil. Is the master haughty, fierce, and arrogant; the scholar swells

with confidence; his eye threatens prodigious things, and his harangue is an

ostentatious display of the common-places of school oratory, dressed up with

dazzling splendour, and thundered forth with emphasis. On the other hand,

does the master value himself for the delicacy of his taste, for the foppery of

glittering  conceits  and  tinsel  ornament;  the  youth  who  has  been  educated

under him, sets out with the same artificial prettiness, the same foppery of

style and manner. A simper plays on his countenance; his elocution is soft

and delicate; his action pathetic; his sentences entangled in a maze of sweet

perplexity; he plays off the whole of his theatrical skill, and hopes to elevate

and surprise.

 
 

 
2. This love of finery, this ambition to shine and glitter, has destroyed all true

eloquence.  Oratory  is  not  the  child  of  hireling  teachers;  it  springs  from

another  source,  from  a  love  of  liberty,  from  a  mind  replete  with  moral

science, and a thorough knowledge of the laws; from a due respect for the

best examples, from profound meditation, and a style formed by constant

practice. While these were thought essential requisites, eloquence flourished.

But the true beauties of language fell into disuse, and oratory went to ruin.The spirit evaporated; I fear, to revive no more. I wish I may prove a false

prophet, but we know the progress of art in every age and country. Rude at

first, it rises from low beginnings, and goes on improving, till it reaches the

highest perfection in the kind. But at that point it is never stationary: it soon

declines, and from the corruption of what is good, it is not in the nature of

man, nor in the power of human faculties, to rise again to the same degree of

excellence.

 
 

 
3. Messala closed with a degree of vehemence, and then turning to Maternus

and Secundus, It is yours, he said, to pursue this train of argument; or if any

cause  of  the  decay  of  eloquence  lies  still  deeper,  you  will  oblige  us  by

bringing it to light. Maternus, I presume, will find no difficulty: a poetic

genius  holds  commerce  with  the  gods,  and  to  him  nothing  will  remain  a

secret. As for Secundus, he has been long a shining ornament of the forum,

and by his own experience knows how to distinguish genuine eloquence from

the corrupt and vicious. Maternus heard this sally of his friend's good humour

with a smile. The task, he said, which you have imposed upon us, we will

endeavour to execute. But though I am the interpreter of the gods, I must

notwithstanding request that Secundus may take the lead. He is master of the

subject, and, in questions of this kind, experience is better than inspiration.

 
 

 
4. Secundus complied with his friend's request. I yield, he said, the more

willingly, as I shall hazard no new opinion, but rather confirm what has been

urged by Messala. It is certain, that, as painters are formed by painters, and

poets by the example of poets, so the young orator must learn his art from

orators  only.  In  the  schools  of  rhetoricians,  who  think  themselves  the

fountain-head  of  eloquence,  every  thing  is  false  and  vitiated.  The  true

principles of the persuasive art are never known to the professor, or if at any

time there may be found a preceptor of superior genius, can it be expected

that  he  shall  be  able  to  transfuse  into  the  mind  of  his  pupil  all  his  own

conceptions,  pure,  unmixed,  and  free  from  error?  The  sensibility  of  the

master,  since  we  have  allowed  him  genius,  will  be  an  impediment:  the

uniformity  of  the  same  dull  tedious  round  will  give  him  disgust,  and  the

student will turn from it with aversion. And yet I am inclined to think, thatthe decay of eloquence would not have been so rapid, if other causes, more

fatal than the corruption of the schools, had not co-operated. When the worst

models became the objects of imitation, and not only the young men of the

age,  but  even  the  whole  body  of  the  people,  admired  the  new  way  of

speaking, eloquence fell at once into that state of degeneracy, from which

nothing  can  recover  it.  We,  who  came  afterwards,  found  ourselves  in  a

hopeless situation: we were driven to wretched expedients, to forced conceits,

and the glitter of frivolous sentences; we were obliged to hunt after wit, when

we  could  be  no  longer  eloquent.  By  what  pernicious  examples  this  was

accomplished, has been explained by our friend Messala.

 
 

 
5. We are none of us strangers to those unhappy times, when Rome, grown

weary of her vast renown in arms, began to think of striking into new paths of

fame, no longer willing to depend on the glory of our ancestors. The whole

power of the state was centred in a single ruler, and by the policy of the

prince, men were taught to think no more of ancient honour. Invention was

on the stretch for novelty, and all looked for something better than perfection;

something  rare,  far-fetched,  and  exquisite.  New  modes  of  pleasure  were

devised.  In  that  period  of  luxury  and  dissipation,  when  the  rage  for  new

inventions was grown epidemic, Seneca arose. His talents were of a peculiar

sort, acute, refined and polished; but polished to a degree that made him

prefer affectation and wit to truth and nature. The predominance of his genius

was great, and, by consequence, he gave the mortal stab to all true eloquence.

When I say this, let me not be suspected of that low malignity which would

tarnish the fame of a great character. I admire the man, and the philosopher.

The undaunted firmness with which he braved the tyrant's frown, will do

immortal honour to his memory. But the fact is (and why should I disguise

it?), the virtues of the writer have undone his country.

 
 

 
6.  To  bring  about  this  unhappy  revolution,  no  man  was  so  eminently

qualified. His understanding was large and comprehensive; his genius rich

and powerful; his way of thinking ingenious, elegant, and even charming. His

researches  in  moral  philosophy  excited  the  admiration  of  all;  and  moral

philosophy is never so highly praised, as when the manners are in a state ofdegeneracy. Seneca knew the taste of the times. He had the art to gratify the

public ear. His style is neat, yet animated; concise, yet clear; familiar, yet

seldom inelegant. Free from redundancy, his periods are often abrupt, but

they  surprise  by  their  vivacity.  He  shines  in  pointed  sentences;  and  that

unceasing  persecution  of  vice,  which  is  kept  up  with  uncommon  ardour,

spreads  a  lustre  over  all  his  writings.  His  brilliant  style  charmed  by  its

novelty. Every page sparkles with wit, with gay allusions, and sentiments of

virtue. No wonder that the graceful ease, and sometimes the dignity of his

expression, made their way into the forum. What pleased universally, soon

found a number of imitators. Add to this the advantages of rank and honours.

He  mixed  in  the  splendour,  and  perhaps  in  the  vices,  of  the  court.  The

resentment of Caligula, and the acts of oppression which soon after followed,

served only to adorn his name. To crown all, Nero was his pupil, and his

murderer.  Hence  the  character  and  genius  of  the  man  rose  to  the  highest

eminence. What was admired, was imitated, and true oratory was heard no

more.  The  love  of  novelty  prevailed,  and  for  the  dignified  simplicity  of

ancient  eloquence  no  taste  remained.  The  art  itself,  and  all  its  necessary

discipline, became ridiculous. In that black period, when vice triumphed at

large,  and  virtue  had  every  thing  to  fear,  the  temper  of  the  times  was

propitious  to  the  corruptors  of  taste  and  liberal  science.  The  dignity  of

composition was no longer of use. It had no power to stop the torrent of vice

which deluged the city of Rome, and virtue found it a feeble protection. In

such a conjuncture it was not safe to speak the sentiments of the heart. To be

obscure,  abrupt,  and  dark,  was  the  best  expedient.  Then  it  was  that  the

affected sententious brevity came into vogue. To speak concisely, and with

an air of precipitation, was the general practice. To work the ruin of a person

accused,  a  single  sentence,  or  a  splendid  phrase,  was  sufficient.  Men

defended themselves in a short brilliant expression; and if that did not protect

them, they died with a lively apophthegm, and their last words were wit. This

was the fashion introduced by Seneca. The peculiar, but agreeable vices of

his style, wrought the downfall of eloquence. The solid was exchanged for

the brilliant, and they, who ceased to be orators, studied to be ingenious.

 
 

 
7. Of late, indeed, we have seen the dawn of better times. In the course of the

last  six  years  Vespasian  has  revived  our  hopes.  The  friend  of  regular

manners, and the encourager of ancient virtue, by which Rome was raised tothe highest pinnacle of glory, he has restored the public peace, and with it the

blessings  of  liberty.  Under  his  propitious  influence,  the  arts  and  sciences

begin  once  more  to  flourish,  and  genius  has  been  honoured  with  his

munificence.  The  example  of  his  sons  has  helped  to  kindle  a  spirit  of

emulation. We beheld, with pleasure, the two princes adding to the dignity of

their  rank,  and  their  fame  in  arms,  all  the  grace  and  elegance  of  polite

literature. But it is fatally true, that when the public taste is once corrupted,

the  mind  which  has  been  warped,  seldom  recovers  its  former  tone.  This

difficulty was rendered still more insurmountable by the licentious spirit of

our young men, and the popular applause, that encouraged the false taste of

the  times.  I  need  not,  in  this  company,  call  to  mind  the  unbridled

presumption, with which, as soon as genuine eloquence expired, the young

men of the age took possession of the forum. Of modest worth and ancient

manners  nothing  remained.  We  know  that  in  former  times  the  youthful

candidate was introduced in the forum by a person of consular rank, and by

him set forward in his road to fame. That laudable custom being at an end, all

fences were thrown down: no sense of shame remained, no respect for the

tribunals of justice. The aspiring genius wanted no patronage; he scorned the

usual forms of a regular introduction; and, with full confidence in his own

powers, he obtruded himself on the court. Neither the solemnity of the place,

nor the sanctity of laws, nor the importance of the oratorical character, could

restrain the impetuosity of young ambition. Unconscious of the importance of

the undertaking, and less sensible of his own incapacity, the bold adventurer

rushed at once into the most arduous business. Arrogance supplied the place

of talents.

 
 

 
8. To oppose the torrent, that bore down every thing, the danger of losing all

fair and honest fame was the only circumstance that could afford a ray of

hope. But even that slender fence was soon removed by the arts of Largius

Licinius. He was the first that opened a new road to ambition. He intrigued

for fame, and filled the benches with an audience suborned to applaud his

declamations.  He  had  his  circle  round  him,  and  shouts  of  approbation

followed. It was upon that occasion that Domitius Afer emphatically said,

Eloquence is now at the last gasp. It had, indeed, at that time shewn manifest

symptoms of decay, but its total ruin may be dated from the introduction of a

mercenary band to flatter and applaud. If we except a chosen few, whosesuperior genius has not as yet been seduced from truth and nature, the rest are

followed by their partisans, like actors on the stage, subsisting altogether on

the  bought  suffrages  of  mean  and  prostitute  hirelings.  Nor  is  this  sordid

traffic carried on with secrecy: we see the bargain made in the face of the

court; the bribe is distributed with as little ceremony as if they were in a

private party at the orator's own house. Having sold their voices, this venal

crew rush forward from one tribunal to another, the distributors of fame, and

the sole judges of literary merit. The practice is, no doubt, disgraceful. To

brand it with infamy, two new terms have been invented, one in the Greek

language, importing the venders of praise, and the other in the Latin idiom,

signifying the parasites who sell their applause for a supper. But sarcastic

expressions  have  not  been  able  to  cure  the  mischief:  the  applauders  by

profession have taken courage, and the name, which was intended as a stroke

of ridicule, is now become an honourable appellation.

 
 

 
9. This infamous practice rages at present with increasing violence. The party

no longer consists of freeborn citizens; our very slaves are hired. Even before

they arrive at full age, we see them distributing the rewards of eloquence.

Without attending to what is said, and without sense enough to understand,

they are sure to crowd the courts of justice, whenever a raw young man,

stung  with  the  love  of  fame,  but  without  talents  to  deserve  it,  obtrudes

himself in the character of an advocate. The hall resounds with acclamations,

or rather with a kind of bellowing; for I know not by what term to express

that savage uproar, which would disgrace a theatre.

 
Upon  the  whole,  when  I  consider  these  infamous  practices,  which  have

brought  so  much  dishonour  upon  a  liberal  profession,  I  am  far  from

wondering that you, Maternus, judged it time to sound your retreat. When

you could no longer attend with honour, you did well, my friend, to devote

yourself entirely to the muses. And now, since you are to close the debate,

permit me to request, that, besides unfolding the causes of corrupt eloquence,

you will fairly tell us, whether you entertain any hopes of better times, and, if

you do, by what means a reformation may be accomplished.

 
 

 
10. It is true, said Maternus, that seeing the forum deluged by an inundationof vices, I was glad, as my friend expressed it, to sound my retreat. I saw

corruption rushing on with hasty strides, too shameful to be defended, and

too powerful to be resisted. And yet, though urged by all those motives, I

should hardly have renounced the business of the bar, if the bias of my nature

had not inclined me to other studies. I balanced, however, for some time. It

was, at first, my fixed resolution to stand to the last a poor remnant of that

integrity and manly eloquence, which still lingered at the bar, and shewed

some signs of life. It was my intention to emulate, not, indeed, with equal

powers, but certainly with equal firmness, the bright models of ancient times,

and, in that course of practice, to defend the fortunes, the dignity, and the

innocence of my fellow-citizens. But the strong impulse of inclination was

not to be resisted. I laid down my arms, and deserted to the safe and tranquil

camp of the muses. But though a deserter, I have not quite forgot the service

in which I was enlisted. I honour the professors of real eloquence, and that

sentiment, I hope, will be always warm in my heart.

 
 

 
11. In my solitary walks, and moments of meditation, it often happens, that I

fall into a train of thinking on the flourishing state of ancient eloquence, and

the abject condition to which it is reduced in modern times. The result of my

reflections I shall venture to unfold, not with a spirit of controversy, nor yet

dogmatically to enforce my own opinion. I may differ in some points, but

from a collision of sentiments it is possible that some new light may be struck

out. My friend Aper will, therefore, excuse me, if I do not, with him, prefer

the false glitter of the moderns to the solid vigour of ancient genius. At the

same time, it is not my intention to disparage his friends. Messala too, whom

you, Secundus, have closely followed, will forgive me, if I do not, in every

thing, coincide with his opinion. The vices of the forum, which you have

both, as becomes men of integrity, attacked with vehemence, will not have

me for their apologist. But still I may be allowed to ask, have not you been

too much exasperated against the rhetoricians?

 
I will not say in their favour, that I think them equal to the task of reviving

the  honours  of  eloquence;  but  I  have  known  among  them,  men  of

unblemished morals, of regular discipline, great erudition, and talents every

way  fit  to  form  the  minds  of  youth  to  a  just  taste  for  science  and  the

persuasive arts. In this number one in particular has lately shone forth withsuperior lustre. From his abilities, all that is in the power of man may fairly

be expected. A genius like his would have been the ornament of better times.

Posterity will admire and honour him. And yet I would not have Secundus

amuse  himself  with  ill-grounded  hopes:  neither  the  learning  of  that  most

excellent man, nor the industry of such as may follow him, will be able to

promote the interests of Eloquence, or to establish her former glory. It is a

lost cause. Before the vices, which have been so ably described, had spread a

general  infection,  all  true  oratory  was  at  an  end.  The  revolutions  in  our

government, and the violence of the times, began the mischief, and, in the

end, gave the fatal blow.

 
 

 
12. Nor are we to wonder at this event. In the course of human affairs there is

no stability, nothing secure or permanent. It is with our minds as with our

bodies: the latter, as soon as they have attained their full growth, and seem to

flourish in the vigour of health, begin, from that moment, to feel the gradual

approaches of decay. Our intellectual powers proceed in the same manner;

they gain strength by degrees, they arrive at maturity, and, when they can no

longer  improve,  they  languish,  droop,  and  fade  away.  This  is  the  law  of

nature, to which every age, and every nation, of which we have any historical

records, have been obliged to submit. There is besides another general law,

hard  perhaps,  but  wonderfully  ordained,  and  it  is  this:  nature,  whose

operations  are  always  simple  and  uniform,  never  suffers  in  any  age  or

country, more than one great example of perfection in the kind. This was the

case in Greece, that prolific parent of genius and of science. She had but one

Homer, one Plato, one Demosthenes. The same has happened at Rome: Virgil

stands at the head of his art, and Cicero is still unrivalled. During a space of

seven hundred years our ancestors were struggling to reach the summit of

perfection: Cicero at length arose; he thundered forth his immortal energy,

and nature was satisfied with the wonder she had made. The force of genius

could go no further. A new road to fame was to be found. We aimed at wit,

and gay conceit, and glittering sentences. The change, indeed, was great; but

it naturally followed the new form of government. Genius died with public

liberty.

 
 

 13. We find that the discourse of men always conforms to the temper of the

times. Among savage nations language is never copious. A few words serve

the purpose of barbarians, and those are always uncouth and harsh, without

the artifice of connection; short, abrupt, and nervous. In a state of polished

society, where a single ruler sways the sceptre, the powers of the mind take a

softer tone, and language grows more refined. But affectation follows, and

precision gives way to delicacy. The just and natural expression is no longer

the fashion. Living in ease and luxury, men look for elegance, and hope by

novelty  to  give  a  grace  to  adulation.  In  other  nations,  where  the  first

principles of the civil union are maintained in vigour; where the people live

under the government of laws, and not the will of man; where the spirit of

liberty  pervades  all  ranks  and  orders  of  the  state;  where  every  individual

holds  himself  bound,  at  the  hazard  of  his  life,  to  defend  the  constitution

framed by his ancestors; where, without being guilty of an impious crime, no

man dares to violate the rights of the whole community; in such a state, the

national  eloquence  will  be  prompt,  bold,  and  animated.  Should  internal

dissensions shake the public peace, or foreign enemies threaten to invade the

land, Eloquence comes forth arrayed in terror; she wields her thunder, and

commands all hearts. It is true, that upon those occasions men of ambition

endeavour, for their own purposes, to spread the flame of sedition; while the

good and virtuous combine their force to quell the turbulent, and repel the

menaces of a foreign enemy. Liberty gains new strength by the conflict, and

the true patriot has the glory of serving his country, distinguished by his

valour in the field, and in debate no less terrible by his eloquence.

 
 

 
14. Hence it is that in free governments we see a constellation of orators.

Hence  Demosthenes  displayed  the  powers  of  his  amazing  genius,  and

acquired immortal honour. He saw a quick and lively people, dissolved in

luxury, open to the seductions of wealth, and ready to submit to a master; he

saw a great and warlike monarch threatening destruction to the liberties of his

country; he saw that prince at the head of powerful armies, renowned for

victory, possessed of an opulent treasury, formidable in battle, and, by his

secret  arts,  still  more  so  in  the  cabinet;  he  saw  that  king,  inflamed  by

ambition  and  the  lust  of  dominion,  determined  to  destroy  the  liberties  of

Greece.  It  was  that  alarming  crisis  that  called  forth  the  powers  of

Demosthenes. Armed with eloquence, and with eloquence only, he stood as abulwark against a combination of enemies foreign and domestic. He roused

his countrymen from their lethargy: he kindled the holy flame of liberty; he

counteracted the machinations of Philip, detected his clandestine frauds, and

fired the men of Athens with indignation. To effect these generous purposes,

and  defeat  the  policy  of  a  subtle  enemy,  what  powers  of  mind  were

necessary! how vast, how copious, how sublime! He thundered and lightened

in  his  discourse;  he  faced  every  danger  with  undaunted  resolution.

Difficulties  served  only  to  inspire  him  with  new  ardour.  The  love  of  his

country glowed in his heart; liberty roused all his powers, and Fame held

forth  her  immortal  wreath  to  reward  his  labours.  These  were  the  fine

incentives that roused his genius, and no wonder that his mind expanded with

vast conceptions. He thought for his country, and, by consequence, every

sentiment was sublime; every expression was grand and magnificent.

 
 

 
XXXVI. The true spirit of genuine eloquence, like an intense fire, is kept

alive  by  fresh  materials:  every  new  commotion  gives  it  vigour,  and  in

proportion as it burns, it expands and brightens to a purer flame. The same

causes at Rome produced the same effect. Tempestuous times called forth the

genius of our ancestors. The moderns, it is true, have taken fire, and rose

above themselves, as often as a quiet, settled, and uniform government gave a

fair opportunity; but eloquence, it is certain, flourishes most under a bold and

turbulent democracy, where the ambitious citizen, who best can mould to his

purposes  a  fierce  and  contentious  multitude,  is  sure  to  be  the  idol  of  the

people. In the conflict of parties, that kept our ancestors in agitation, laws

were  multiplied;  the  leading  chiefs  were  the  favourite  demagogues;  the

magistrates were often engaged in midnight debate; eminent citizens were

brought to a public trial; families were set at variance; the nobles were split

into factions, and the senate waged incessant war against the people. Hence

that flame of eloquence which blazed out under the republican government,

and hence that constant fuel that kept the flame alive.

 
The  state,  it  is  true,  was  often  thrown  into  convulsions:  but  talents  were

exercised, and genius opened the way to public honours. He who possessed

the powers of persuasion, rose to eminence, and by the arts which gave him

popularity, he was sure to eclipse his colleagues. He strengthened his interest

with the leading men, and gained weight and influence not only in the senate,but in all assemblies of the people. Foreign nations courted his friendship.

The  magistrates,  setting  out  for  their  provinces,  made  it  their  business  to

ingratiate themselves with the popular speaker, and, at their return, took care

to renew their homage. The powerful orator had no occasion to solicit for

preferment: the offices of prætor and consul stood open to receive him. He

was invited to those exalted stations. Even in the rank of a private citizen he

had a considerable share of power, since his authority swayed at once the

senate and the people. It was in those days a settled maxim, that no man

could either rise to dignities, or support himself in office, without possessing,

in an eminent degree, a power of words, and dignity of language.

 
Nor  can  this  be  a  matter  of  wonder,  when  we  recollect,  that  persons  of

distinguished genius were, on various occasions, called forth by the voice of

the people, and in their presence obliged to act an important part. Eloquence

was the ruling passion of all. The reason is, it was not then sufficient merely

to vote in the senate; it was necessary to support that vote with strength of

reasoning, and a flow of language. Moreover, in all prosecutions, the party

accused was expected to make his defence in person, and to examine the

witnesses, who at that time were not allowed to speak in written depositions,

but  were  obliged  to  give  their  testimony  in  open  court.  In  this  manner,

necessity, no less than the temptation of bright rewards, conspired to make

men cultivate the arts of oratory. He who was known to possess the powers of

speech, was held in the highest veneration. The mute and silent character fell

into contempt. The dread of shame was a motive not less powerful than the

ambition that aimed at honours. To sink into the humiliating rank of a client,

instead of maintaining the dignity of a patron, was a degrading thought. Men

were unwilling to see the followers of their ancestors transferred to other

families for protection. Above all, they dreaded the disgrace of being thought

unworthy of civil honours; and, if by intrigue they attained their wishes, the

fear of being despised for incapacity was a spur to quicken their ardour in the

pursuit of literary fame and commanding eloquence.

 
 

 
XXXVII. I do not know whether you have as yet seen the historical memoirs

which Mucianus has collected, and lately published, containing, in eleven

volumes,  the  transactions  of  the  times,  and,  in  three  more,  the  letters  of

eminent men who figured on the stage of public business. This portion ofhistory is well authenticated by the original papers, still extant in the libraries

of the curious. From this valuable collection it appears, that Pompey and

Crassus owed their elevation as much to their talents as to their fame in arms;

and that Lentulus, Metellus, Lucullus, Curio, and others of that class, took

care to enlarge their minds, and distinguish themselves by their powers of

speech. To say all in one word, no man, in those times, rose to eminence in

the state, who had not given proof of his genius in the forum and the tribunals

of justice.

 
To this it may be added, that the importance, the splendour, and magnitude of

the questions discussed in that period, served to animate the public orator.

The subject, beyond all doubt, lifts the mind above itself: it gives vigour to

sentiment, and energy to expression. Let the topic be a paltry theft, a dry form

of pleading, or a petty misdemeanor; will not the orator feel himself cramped

and chilled by the meanness of the question? Give him a cause of magnitude,

such as bribery in the election of magistrates, a charge for plundering the

allies  of  Rome,  or  the  murder  of  Roman  citizens,  how  different  then  his

emotions! how sublime each sentiment! what dignity of language! The effect,

it must be admitted, springs from the disasters of society. It is true, that form

of government, in which no such evils occur, must, beyond all question, be

allowed to be the best; but since, in the course of human affairs, sudden

convulsions must happen, my position is, that they produced, at Rome, that

flame of eloquence which at this hour is so much admired. The mind of the

orator  grows  and  expands  with  his  subject.  Without  ample  materials  no

splendid oration was ever yet produced. Demosthenes, I believe, did not owe

his vast reputation to the speeches which he made against his guardians; nor

was it either the oration in defence of Quinctius, or that for Archias the poet,

that established the character of Cicero. It was Catiline, it was Verres, it was

Milo and Mark Antony, that spread so much glory round him.

 
Let me not be misunderstood: I do not say, that for the sake of hearing a

bright display of eloquence, it is fit that the public peace should be disturbed

by the machinations of turbulent and lawless men. But, not to lose sight of

the question before us, let it be remembered, that we are enquiring about an

art which thrives and flourishes most in tempestuous times. It were, no doubt,

better that the public should enjoy the sweets of peace, than be harassed by

the calamities of war: but still it is war that produces the soldier and great

commander. It is the same with Eloquence. The oftener she is obliged, if Imay so express it, to take the field, the more frequent the engagement, in

which she gives and receives alternate wounds, and the more formidable her

adversary; the more she rises in pomp and grandeur, and returns from the

warfare of the forum crowned with unfading laurels. He, who encounters

danger, is ever sure to win the suffrages of mankind. For such is the nature of

the human mind, that, in general, we choose a state of security for ourselves,

but never fail to gaze with admiration on the man, whom we see, in the

conflict of parties, facing his adversaries, and surmounting difficulties.

 
 

 
XXXVIII. I proceed to another advantage of the ancient forum; I mean the

form of proceeding and the rules of practice observed in those days. Our

modern custom is, I grant, more conducive to truth and justice; but that of

former times gave to eloquence a free career, and, by consequence, greater

weight  and  splendour.  The  advocate  was  not,  as  now,  confined  to  a  few

hours;  he  might  adjourn  as  often  as  it  suited  his  convenience;  he  might

expatiate, as his genius prompted him: and the number of days, like that of

the several patrons, was unlimited. Pompey was the first who circumscribed

the genius of men within narrower limits. In his third consulship he gave a

check to eloquence, and, as it were, bridled its spirit, but still left all causes to

be  tried  according  to  law  in  the  forum,  and  before  the  prætors.  The

importance of the business, which was decided in that court of justice, will be

evident, if we compare it with the transactions before the centumvirs, who at

present have cognizance of all matters whatever. We have not so much as one

oration of Cicero or Cæsar, of Brutus, Cælius, or Calvus, or any other person

famous  for  his  eloquence,  which  was  delivered  before  the  last-mentioned

jurisdiction, excepting only the speeches of Asinius Pollio for the heirs of

Urbinia. But those speeches were delivered about the middle of the reign of

Augustus,  when,  after  a  long  peace  with  foreign  nations,  and  a  profound

tranquillity  at  home,  that  wise  and  politic  prince  had  conquered  all

opposition,  and  not  only  triumphed  over  party  and  faction,  but  subdued

eloquence itself.

 
 

 
XXXIX. What I am going to say will appear, perhaps, too minute; it may

border on the ridiculous, and excite your mirth: with all my heart; I willhazard it for that very reason. The dress now in use at the bar has an air of

meanness: the speaker is confined in a close robe, and loses all the grace of

action. The very courts of judicature are another objection; all causes are

heard, at present, in little narrow rooms, where spirit and strenuous exertion

are unnecessary. The orator, like a generous steed, requires liberty and ample

space: before a scanty tribunal his spirit droops, and the dullness of the scene

damps the powers of genius. Add to this, we pay no attention to style; and

indeed how should we? No time is allowed for the beauties of composition:

the judge calls upon you to begin, and you must obey, liable, at the same

time,  to  frequent  interruptions,  while  documents  are  read,  and  witnesses

examined.

 
During  all  this  formality,  what  kind  of  an  audience  has  the  orator  to

invigorate his faculties? Two or three stragglers drop in by chance, and to

them the whole business seems to be transacted in solitude. But the orator

requires  a  different  scene.  He  delights  in  clamour,  tumult,  and  bursts  of

applause. Eloquence must have her theatre, as was the case in ancient times,

when the forum was crowded with the first men in Rome; when a numerous

train of clients pressed forward with eager expectation; when the people, in

their several tribes; when ambassadors from the colonies, and a great part of

Italy; attended to hear the debate; in short, when all Rome was interested in

the event. We know that in the cases of Cornelius, Scaurus, Milo, Bestia, and

Vatinius, the concourse was so great, that those several causes were tried

before the whole body of the people. A scene so vast and magnificent was

enough  to  inflame  the  most  languid  orator.  The  speeches  delivered  upon

those occasions are in every body's hands, and, by their intrinsic excellence,

we of this day estimate the genius of the respective authors.

 
 

 
XL. If we now consider the frequent assemblies of the people, and the right

of prosecuting the most eminent men in the state; if we reflect on the glory

that sprung from the declared hostility of the most illustrious characters; if we

recollect, that even Scipio, Sylla, and Pompey, were not sheltered from the

storms of eloquence, what a number of causes shall we see conspiring to

rouse  the  spirit  of  the  ancient  forum!  The  malignity  of  the  human  heart,

always adverse to superior characters, encouraged the orator to persist. The

very players, by sarcastic allusions to men in power, gratified the public ear,and, by consequence, sharpened the wit and acrimony of the bold declaimer.

 
Need I observe to you, that in all I have said, I have not been speaking of that

temperate  faculty  which  delights  in  quiet  times,  supported  by  its  own

integrity, and the virtues of moderation? I speak of popular eloquence, the

genuine offspring of that licentiousness, to which fools and ill-designing men

have given the name of liberty: I speak of bold and turbulent oratory, that

inflamer  of  the  people,  and  constant  companion  of  sedition;  that  fierce

incendiary, that knows no compliance, and scorns to temporize; busy, rash,

and arrogant, but, in quiet and well regulated governments, utterly unknown.

Who ever heard of an orator at Crete or Lacedæmon? In those states a system

of  rigorous  discipline  was  established  by  the  first  principles  of  the

constitution. Macedonian and Persian eloquence are equally unknown. The

same may be said of every country, where the plan of government was fixed

and uniform.

 
At Rhodes, indeed, and also at Athens, orators existed without number, and

the reason is, in those communities the people directed every thing; a giddy

multitude governed, and, to say the truth, all things were in the power of all.

In  like  manner,  while  Rome  was  engaged  in  one  perpetual  scene  of

contention; while parties, factions, and internal divisions, convulsed the state;

no peace in the forum, in the senate no union of sentiment; while the tribunals

of justice acted without moderation; while the magistrates knew no bounds,

and  no  man  paid  respect  to  eminent  merit;  in  such  times  it  must  be

acknowledged that Rome produced a race of noble orators; as in the wild

uncultivated field the richest vegetables will often shoot up, and flourish with

uncommon vigour. And yet it is fair to ask, Could all the eloquence of the

Gracchi atone for the laws which they imposed on their country? Could the

fame which Cicero obtained by his eloquence, compensate for the tragic end

to which it brought him?

 
 

 
XLI. The forum, at present, is the last sad relic of ancient oratory. But does

that epitome of former greatness give the idea of a city so well regulated, that

we may rest contented with our form of government, without wishing for a

reformation of abuses? If we except the man of guilt, or such as labour under

the  hard  hand  of  oppression,  who  resorts  to  us  for  our  assistance?  If  amunicipal city applies for protection, it is, when the inhabitants, harassed by

the adjacent states, or rent and torn by intestine divisions, sue for protection.

The province, that addresses the senate for a redress of grievances, has been

oppressed  and  plundered,  before  we  hear  of  the  complaint.  It  is  true,  we

vindicate the injured, but to suffer no oppression would surely be better than

to obtain relief. Find, if you can, in any part of the world a wise and happy

community, where no man offends against the laws: in such a nation what

can be the use of oratory? You may as well profess the healing art where ill

health  is  never  known.  Let  men  enjoy  bodily  vigour,  and  the  practice  of

physic will have no encouragement. In like manner, where sober manners

prevail, and submission to the authority of government is the national virtue,

the powers of persuasion are rendered useless. Eloquence has lost her field of

glory. In the senate, what need of elaborate speeches, when all good men are

already of one mind? What occasion for studied harangues before a popular

assembly, where the form of government leaves nothing to the decision of a

wild democracy, but the whole administration is conducted by the wisdom of

a  single  ruler?  And  again;  when  crimes  are  rare,  and  in  fact  of  no  great

moment,  what  avails  the  boasted  right  of  individuals  to  commence  a

voluntary prosecution? What necessity for a studied defence, often composed

in a style of vehemence, artfully addressed to the passions, and generally

stretched beyond all bounds, when justice is executed in mercy, and the judge

is of himself disposed to succour the distressed?

 
Believe me, my very good, and (as far as the times will admit) my eloquent

friends, had it been your lot to live under the old republic, and the men whom

we so much admire had been reserved for the present age; if some god had

changed the period of theirs and your existence, the flame of genius had been

yours, and the chiefs of antiquity would now be acting with minds subdued to

the temper of the times. Upon the whole, since no man can enjoy a state of

calm tranquillity, and, at the same time, raise a great and splendid reputation;

to be content with the benefits of the age in which we live, without detracting

from our ancestors, is the virtue that best becomes us.

 
 

 
XLII.  Maternus  concluded  his  discourse.  There  have  been,  said  Messala,

some points advanced, to which I do not entirely accede; and others, which I

think require farther explanation. But the day is well nigh spent. We will,therefore, adjourn the debate. Be it as you think proper, replied Maternus; and

if, in what I have said, you find any thing not sufficiently clear, we will adjust

those matters in some future conference. Hereupon he rose from his seat, and

embracing Aper, I am afraid, he said, that it will fare hardly with you, my

good friend. I shall cite you to answer before the poets, and Messala will

arraign you at the bar of the antiquarians. And I, replied Aper, shall make

reprisals on you both before the school professors and the rhetoricians. This

occasioned some mirth and raillery. We laughed, and parted in good humour.

 
 

 
END OF THE DIALOGUE.

 