 
THE PHILOSOPHY OF

SPACE

TIME
HANS REIE{H ENBACH

Translated by

MARIA REICHENBACH
AND.
JOHN FREUND

With Introductory Remarks by
RUDOLF CARNAP

DOVER PUBLICATIONS, INC.
NEW YORK
THE PHILOSOPHY OF

SPACE

TIME
HANS REIE{H ENBACH

Translated by

MARIA REICHENBACH
AND.
JOHN FREUND

With Introductory Remarks by
RUDOLF CARNAP

DOVER PUBLICATIONS, INC.
NEW YORK
Copyright © 1958 by Maria Reichenbach. All rights reserved.




                                              This Dover edition, first published in

                                              1957, is a new English translation of

                                                Philosophie der RaumZeit-Lehre.




Library of Congress Catalog Card Number: 58-7082 

International Standard Book Number

9780486138039

 

Manufactured in the United States by Courier Corporation 

60443823 

  www.doverpublications.comACKNOWLEDGEMENT








The  English  translation  of  this  book  was  partly  checked  by  my  late

husband. In the preparation of the manuscript for publication valuable help

was given me by Professor Rudolf Carnap, Dr. Wesley C. Salmon, and Dr.

Bruce Taylor.

My special thanks go to Mrs. Ruth Anna Mathers, who for many weeks

worked patiently with me on the final version.

                                                            MARIA REICHENBACH

 

Los Angeles 

July 1956PREFACE








The publication of this book gives me the welcome opportunity to express

my appreciation to the Notgemeinschaft der deutschen Wissenschaft which

has  enabled  me  for  a  number  of  years  to  carry  on  my  work  in  the

philosophical analysis of physics.

I thank Dr. Rudolf Carnap, Vienna, and Dr. Kurt Grelling, Berlin, for their

friendly  criticisms  concerning  some  details,  and  Mr.  Hans  Stotz  and  Mr.

Martin Strauss for their valuable help in the proofreading of the manuscript.

                                                              HANS REICHENBACH

 

Berlin, 

October 1927INTRODUCTORY REMARKS TO


THE ENGLISH EDITION








  Since  ancient  times  the  question  of  the  nature  of  geometry  has  been  a

decisive problem for any theory of knowledge. The principles of geometry,

e.g.,  Euclid’s  axioms,  seem  to  possess  two  characteristics  which  are  not

easily reconciled. On the one hand, they appear as immediately evident and

therefore to hold with necessity. On the other hand, their validity is not purely

logical but factual; in technical terms, they are not analytic but synthetic. This

is shown by the fact that, on the basis of certain measurements of angles and

lengths of physical bodies the results of other measurements can be predicted.

Kant  boldly  accepted  the  conjunction  of  both  characteristics:  from  the

apparently necessary validity of the principles of geometry he concluded that

their knowledge is a priori (i.e., independent of experience) although they are

synthetic.  When  mathematicians  constructed  about  a  hundred  years  ago

systems of non-Euclidean geometries, a controversy arose about the method

of determining which of the systems, one Euclidean and infinitely many non-

Euclidean, holds for the space of physics. Gauss was the first to suggest that

the determination should be made by physical measurements. But the great

majority of philosophers throughout the last century maintained the Kantian

doctrine that geometry is independent of experience.

At the beginning of our century Poincaré pointed out the following new

aspect of the situation. No matter what observational facts are found, the

physicist is free to ascribe to physical space any one of the mathematically

possible geometrical structures, provided he makes suitable adjustments inthe laws of mechanics and optics and consequently in the rules for measuring

length. This was an important insight. But Poincaré went further and asserted

that physicists would always choose the Euclidean structure because of its

simplicity.  History  refuted  this  prediction  only  a  few  years  later,  when

Einstein  used  a  certain  non-Euclidean  geometry  in  his  general  theory  of

relativity. Hereby he obtained a considerable gain in simplicity for the total

system of physics in spite of the loss in simplicity for geometry.

  Through this development it has become clear that the situation concerning

the nature of geometry is as follows. It is necessary to distinguish between

pure or mathematical geometry and physical geometry. The statements of

pure geometry hold logically, but they deal only with abstract structures and

say nothing about physical space. Physical geometry describes the structure

of physical space; it is a part of physics. The validity of its statements is to be

established empirically—as it has to be in any other part of physics—after

rules for measuring the magnitudes involved, especially length, have been

stated.  (In  Kantian  terminology,  mathematical  geometry  holds  indeed a

priori, as Kant asserted, but only because it is analytic. Physical geometry is

indeed synthetic; but it is based on experience and hence does not hold a

priori. In neither of the two branches of science which are called “geometry”

do  synthetic  judgments a  priori  occur.  Thus  Kant’s  doctrine  must  be

abandoned.)

In physical geometry, there are two possible procedures for establishing a

theory of physical space. First, the physicist may freely choose the rules for

measuring length. After this choice is made, the question of the geometrical

structure of physical space becomes empirical; it is to be answered on the

basis of the results of experiments. Alternatively, the physicist may freely

choose the structure of physical space; but then he must adjust the rules of

measurement  in  view  of  the  observational  facts.  (Although  Poincaré

emphasized the second way, he also saw the first clearly. This point seems to

be overlooked by those philosophers, among them Reichenbach, who regard

Poincaré’s view on geometry as non-empiricist and purely conventionalist.)

The  view  just  outlined  concerning  the  nature  of  geometry  in  physics

stresses, on the one hand, the empirical character of physical geometry and,

on the other hand, recognizes the important function of conventions. This

view was developed in the twenties of our century by those philosophers who

studied the logical and methodological problems connected with the theory ofrelativity,  among  them  Schlick,  Reichenbach,  and  myself.  The  first

comprehensive and systematic representation of this conception was given by

Reichenbach in 1928 in his Philosophie der Raum-Zeit-Lehre (the original of

the  present  translation).  This  work  was  an  important  landmark  in  the

development of the empiricist conception of geometry. In my judgment it is

still the best book in the field. Therefore the appearance of an English edition

is to be highly welcomed; it satisfies a definite need, all the more since the

German original is out of print.

The book deals with the problems of the foundations of geometry—and

also of the theory of time, closely connected with that of space by Einstein’s

conception—in all their various aspects, e.g., the relations between theory

and  observations,  connected  by  coordinative  definitions,  the  relations

between  topological  and  metrical  properties  of  space,  and  also  the

psychological  problem  of  the  possibility  of  a  visual  intuition  of  non-

Euclidean structures.

Of  the  many  fruitful  ideas  which  Reichenbach  contributed  to  the

development of this philosophical theory, I will mention only one, which

seems to me of great interest for the methodology of physics but which has so

far not found the attention it deserves. This is the principle of the elimination

of universal forces. Reichenbach calls those physical forces universal which

affect all substances in the same way and against which no isolating walls can

be built. Let T be the form of Einstein’s theory which uses that particular

non-Euclidean structure of space which Einstein proposes; in T there are no

universal forces. According to our above discussion, T can be transformed

into another form T’ which is physically equivalent with T in the sense of

yielding  the  same  observable  results,  but  uses  a  different  geometrical

structure. Reichenbach shows that any such theory T’ has to assume that our

measuring rods undergo contractions or expansions depending merely upon

their  positions  in  space,  and  hence  has  to  introduce  universal  forces  to

account  for  these  changes.  Reichenbach  proposes  to  accept  as  a  general

methodological  principle  that  we  choose  that  form  of  a  theory  among

physically  equivalent  forms  (or,  in  other  words,  that  definition  of  “rigid

body” or “measuring standard ”) with respect to which all universal forces

disappear. If this principle is accepted, the arbitrariness in the choice of a

measuring procedure is avoided and the question of the geometrical structure

of  physical  space  has  a  unique  answer,  to  be  determined  by  physicalmeasurements.

  Even more outstanding than the contributions of detail in this book is the

spirit in which it was written. The constant careful attention to scientifically

established facts and to the content of the scientific hypotheses to be analyzed

and logically reconstructed, the exact formulation of the philosophical results,

and  the  clear  and  cogent  presentation  of  the  arguments  supporting  them,

make this work a model of scientific thinking in philosophy.

                                                                  RUDOLF CARNAP

University of California 

at Los Angeles 

July, 1956Table of Contents










    Title Page

    Copyright Page

      ACKNOWLEDGEMENT

    PREFACE

      INTRODUCTORY REMARKS TO THE ENGLISH EDITION

      INTRODUCTION

    CHAPTER I. SPACE

    CHAPTER II. TIME

    CHAPTER III. SPACE AND TIME

    INDEXINTRODUCTION








If the philosophical method of our time is compared with the method of the

great system builders of the 17th and 18th centuries, a fundamental difference

in  the  respective  attitudes  to  the  natural  sciences  becomes  evident.  The

classical philosophers had a close connection with the science of their times;

some of them, such as Descartes and Leibniz, were leading mathematicians

and  physicists  themselves.  More  recently  philosophy  and  science  have

become  estranged,  a  situation  which  has  led  to  an  unproductive  tension

between the two groups. The philosophers, whose professional training has

usually been acquired in the pursuit of historical and philological studies,

accuse  the  scientist  of  too  much  specialization  and  turn  instead  to

metaphysical problems; the scientists, on the other hand, miss in philosophy

the  treatment  of  epistemological  problems,  which,  though  solved  by  a

Leibniz or Kant within the framework of the science of their time, demand a

fresh analysis within the framework of contemporary science. This alienation

is expressed in mutual contempt in which each misunderstands the purposes

of the other’s endeavors.

  Looking  back  into  history  one  can  trace  the  roots  of  this  division

throughout the past century. For Kant, knowledge as realized in mathematical

physics  was  still  the  starting  point  of  epistemology;  although  this  basis

constitutes  a  certain  one-sidedness  of  his  system,  it  also  accounts  for  the

strength  of  his  epistemological  position  to  which  his  philosophy  owes  its

great  influence.  It  is  surprising,  however,  how  little  use  Kant  made  of

particular  scientific  results  in  the  elaboration  of  his  system,  how  little

scientific material he employed in his main epistemological works, even inthe  form  of  examples.  He  must  have  seen  the  scientific  conception  of

knowledge as a whole and created his system out of this experience, which

produced, as the result of an analysis of pure reason, the very conception of

knowledge of the mathematical physics of his time. How well he must have

explicated  this  conception  of  knowledge  can  be  inferred  from  the  vivid

interest expressed by the natural scientists. Whether they were adversaries or

adherents, a clarification of their position with respect to that of Kant seemed

to be natural and necessary to them, and they gradually identified Kant’s

doctrine with philosophy as such. But Kant’s solution of the epistemological

problem was at the same time the last one in which science played a role.

Later philosophical systems had no longer any connection with the science of

their time; and though some of them, such as Schelling’s and Hegel’s natural

philosophy,  treated  scientific  material  to  a  larger  extent  than  Kant,  their

philosophy of nature is a naive evaluation of scientific results rather than a

true understanding of the spirit of scientific research. Since then science and

philosophy  have  remained  separated.  The  speculative  and  the  rationalist-

analytic components of Kant’s system were preserved, while the relation to

science was renounced. The philosopher allied himself with the humanities;

so far as science interested him at all, he surmised that the problem of science

had  been  solved  since  Kant  and  that  a  further  development  of  science

consisted only in filling out Kant’s program, a conception which even in the

more flexible form of the Neo-Kantian school could not be prevented from

coming into conflict with the actual development of science. Science, in the

meantime, went its own way. Certainly, one cannot reproach Kant for not

anticipating this development, but neither can one expect the modern scientist

to  acknowledge  Kant’s  philosophy  as  the  basis  of  his  own  epistemology.

Neither in Kant nor in the prevailing schools of philosophy does he find an

epistemology  that  enables  him  to  understand  his  own  scientific  activity.

Philosophy still acts like a stranger toward the gigantic complex of natural

science, even to the point of rejecting it.

In the course of the last century the scientists themselves elaborated the

epistemological foundations as well as the content of scientific theories. Of

course,  only  a  few  outstanding  men  were  conscious  of  the  philosophical

character  of  their  methodology;  most  of  the  results  were  achieved

inadvertently  without  intending  philosophical  solutions,  in  the  pursuit  of

specific  scientific  interests  which,  however,  were  bound  to  lead  to

philosophical inquiries. Thus we are faced with the strange result that duringthe  last  century  an  exact  theory  of  knowledge  was  constructed,  not  by

philosophers, but by scientists, and that in the pursuit of particular scientific

investigations  more  epistemology  was  produced  than  in  the  process  of

philosophical  speculation.  And  the  problems  thus  solved  were  truly

epistemological  problems.  If  the  speculatively  oriented  philosophy  of  our

time denies to contemporary science its philosophical character, if it calls

contributions  such  as  the  theory  of  relativity  or  the  theory  of  sets

unphilosophical  and  belonging  in  the  special  sciences,  this  judgment

expresses only the inability to perceive the philosophical content of modern

scientific thought. Today mathematical physics, by means of its infinitely

refined mathematical and experimental methods, treats the same problems

that constituted the foundation of the epistemology of Descartes, Leibniz and

Kant.  Yet  an  adequate  insight  into  the  techniques  of  scientific  inquiry  is

necessary in order to understand what a powerful instrument for the analysis

of basic philosophical questions has been created and what potentialities for

philosophical exploitation it contains.

  Gradually,  however,  the  situation  has  become  too  complicated  for  the

scientist. He can no longer work out the actual philosophical implications, for

the simple reason that one individual is not capable of carrying on scientific

and  philosophical  work  at  the  same  time.  A  division  of  labor  seems

inevitable, since empirical as well as epistemological research demands an

amount  of  detailed  work  that  surpasses  the  capacity  of  one  individual.  It

should also be mentioned that the philosophical and scientific goals, though

in general depending upon each other, oppose each other within the mentality

of  the  individual  scholar.  The  philosophic  analysis  of  the  meaning  and

significance  of  scientific  statements  can  almost  hinder  the  processes  of

scientific research and paralyze the pioneering spirit, which would lack the

courage to walk new paths without a certain amount of irresponsibility. The

style of modern science has gradually adopted the hurried pace of technology

induced by competition; one might regret this mechanistic trend, but it seems

to be the necessary form of modern productivity. We cannot counteract this

tendency by a competition with less technical means, but solely by means of

a philosophical analysis of the process of knowledge itself; it is the discovery

of the significance of this machine age knowledge which, in the minds of

many people, will remain mere technology, but which, in its system as a

whole,  reveals  a  depth  of  insight  that  can  only  be  reached  through  the

teamwork of an organized group of individual scholars.To  carry  out  such  a  philosophy  of  nature  must  therefore  remain  the

prerogative of a special group of individual scholars such as has recently

emerged,  of  a  group  that  on  the  one  hand  masters  the  technique  of

mathematical science, and on the other hand is not weighed down by it to

such an extent as to lose its philosophic perspective over details. For in the

same way as philosophic contemplation can inhibit the daring step of the

scientific  investigator,  specialized  research  can  limit  the  ability  for

philosophic interpretation. The reproach by philosophers that scientists lack

an understanding of philosophical problems is no less justified than the one

voiced  by  the  other  side  charging  a  lack  of  understanding  of  scientific

problems.

  From this circumstance one should not draw the conclusion, however, that

one  ought  to  carry  on  philosophy  in  a  speculative  vein,  apart  from  the

sciences. On the contrary, one should approach science from a philosophical

point of view and try to construct with its sharpened tools the philosophy of

this technically refined knowledge.

  From  this  point  of  view,  the  author  has  carried  through  a  number  of

investigations exploring the complex of mathematical physics from various

directions. The natural organization of this basic science led to the decision to

present the investigations concerning the problems of time and space as a

separate unit; an exposition of further studies will follow. For the theory of

space  and  time  comprehensive  material  was  available,  arising  on  the  one

hand from the mathematical analysis of geometry, on the other hand from

Einstein’s theory of relativity. This theory provides a vivid example of the

fruitfulness  of  physical  questions  for  philosophical  explication.  Thus  a

philosophy of space and time is nowadays always a philosophy of relativity

—this duality probably characterizes best the method of scientific analysis

which is the basis of such a philosophy.

It  seemed  necessary  to  include  an  exposition  of  the  material  in  our

presentation. A mere reference to mathematico-physical publications of the

material would be inadequate, because all these books are geared too much to

a  mathematico-physical  interpretation  and  neglect  the  philosophical

foundations. On the other hand, it seemed to be out of the question to enter

into a philosophical evaluation of this material without keeping it clearly in

mind at every moment. Modern philosophy of nature will have to develop in

as close a connection with the actual natural and mathematical sciences as hasbeen  taken  for  granted  for  cultural  philosophy  and  its  historical  subject

matter. And if we permit historians of philosophy to quote repeatedly, in their

presentations, parts of the original historical text whose content cannot be

completely exhausted by being paraphrased or translated, we should not be

surprised that in his philosophical investigations of nature the philosopher

will go back to the original mathematical language in which the “book of

nature” is written, since mathematical language can even less be exhausted by

being  paraphrased  or  translated.  A  considerable  part  of  the  necessary

mathematical  work  was  completed  in  the  author’s Axiomatik  der
                                      1
relativistischen Raum-Zeit-Lehre  and  detailed  mathematical  computations

could therefore be omitted from this book. The philosophical interpretation of

the theory of space and time presupposes the earlier work to which I have to

refer the reader for rigorous proofs of many statements in the present book.

But the occasional use of a mathematical formula occurring in the text will

throw even more light upon the epistemological foundation.

The  path  of  the  present  philosophical  work  led  therefore  through  the

natural sciences, yet the wealth of mathematical and physical material did not

appear  as  an  obstacle,  but  rather  as  an  inexhaustible  source  of  further

philosophical insights. It is hoped, in this manner, to give an example of the

superiority of a philosophical method closely connected with the results of

empirical  science.  All  the  detailed  mathematical  work  achieved  by

outstanding men is at its disposal and becomes systematically integrated from

the viewpoint of the philosopher. Formulations whose universality would not

mean  anything  in  isolation  acquire  the  utmost  significance,  if  they  are

supported by a detailed analysis of particular instances which they generalize.

Modern scientific epistemology therefore justifies discoveries of such far-

reaching consequences as would, in former times, have been merely empty

speculation, phantasies without empirical foundation. It is characteristic of

this emerging scientific trend in philosophy to emphasize the combination of

detailed work with an overall comprehensiveness of the problem; whoever

charges it with narrow-mindedness or sterility shows only that he confuses

rigor of method with narrowness of aim.

This book has been written in the knowledge that solutions are attainable.

It is intended, at the same time, to present in a comprehensive fashion the

treasure of philosophical results that has become the common property of

scientific philosophy, constituting already a certain common tradition, andalso to go beyond it on new paths that were opened to the author through a

persistent analysis of mathematical physics. If in this survey, therefore, ideas

are not always traced back to their authors, this will best be understood by a

person who is a collaborator in this field and who knows how frequently

ideas  are  oscillating  today  between  various  thinkers  until  they  find  their

ultimate  formulation  as  a  product  of  teamwork.  This  accumulation  of

common  knowledge  is  the  characteristic  mark  of  the  new  philosophical

orientation, which, due to its origin in the empirical sciences, stands even

methodologically  in  contrast  to  the  isolated  systems  of  the  speculative

philosophers and gains its superiority from this source. Philosophy of science

is not intended to be one of those systems that originate in the mind of a

lonely  thinker  and  stand  like  marble  monuments  before  the  gaze  of

generations, but should be considered a science like the other sciences, a fund

of cooperatively discovered propositions whose acceptance, independent of

the framework of a system, can be required from anybody interested in these

matters. The meaning of concepts may vary, of course, depending upon the

context in which they are used; but this kind of ambiguity can be avoided by

making  language  more  precise  and  need  not  lead  to  a  renunciation  of

objective philosophical knowledge altogether. If the effect of the philosophy

of systems was to destroy the concept of philosophical truth and replace it by

the concept of consistency within the system, one may see as the noblest aim

of scientific philosophy the establishment of the concept of objective truth as

the ultimate criterion of all philosophical knowledge.CHAPTER I. SPACE









§ 1. THE AXIOM OF THE PARALLELS AND NON-

EUCLIDEAN GEOMETRY

In Euclid’s work, the geometrical achievements of the ancients reached

their final form: geometry was established as a closed and complete system.
                                                                          2
The basis of the system was given by the geometrical axioms, from which

all  theorems  were  derived.  The  great  practical  significance  of  this

construction consisted in the fact that it endowed geometry with a certainty

never previously attained by any other science. The small number of axioms

forming the foundation of the system were so self-evident that their truth was

accepted without reservation. The entire construction of geometry was carried

through by a skillful combination of the axioms alone, without any addition

of further assumptions; the reliability of the logical inferences used in the

proofs was so great that the derived theorems, which were sometimes quite

involved, could be regarded as certain as the axioms. Geometry thus became

the prototype of a demonstrable science, the first instance of a scientific rigor

which, since that time, has been the ideal of every science. In particular, the

philosophers of all ages have regarded it as their highest aim to prove their

conclusions “ by the geometrical method.”

  Euclid’s axiomatic construction was also important in another respect. The

problem of demonstrability of a science was solved by Euclid in so far as he

had  reduced  the  science  to  a  system  of  axioms.  But  now  arose  the

epistemological question how to justify the truth of those first assumptions. If

the certainty of the axioms was transferred to the derived theorems by meansof  the  system  of  logical  concatenations,  the  problem  of  the  truth  of  this

involved  construction  was  transferred,  conversely,  to  the  axioms.  It  is

precisely  the  assertion  of  the  truth  of  the  axioms  which  epitomizes  the

problem of scientific knowledge, once the connection between axioms and

theorems  has  been  carried  through.  In  other  words:  the implicational

character  of  mathematical  demonstrability  was  recognized,  i.e.,  the

undeniable fact that only the implication “if a, then b” is accessible to logical

proof. The problem of the categorical assertion “a is true b is true”, which is

no longer tied to the “if”, calls for an independent solution. The truth of the

axioms,  in  fact,  represents  the  intrinsic  problem  of  every  science.  The

axiomatic method has not been able to establish knowledge with absolute

certainty; it could only reduce the question of such knowledge to a precise

thesis and thus present it for philosophical discussion.

This effect of the axiomatic construction, however, was not recognized

until long after Euclid’s time. Precise epistemological formulations could not

be expected from a naive epoch, in which philosophy was not yet based upon

well-developed  special  sciences,  and  thinkers  concerned  themselves  with

cruder things than the truth of simple and apparently self-evident axioms.

Unless  one  was  a  skeptic,  one  was  content  with  the  fact  that  certain

assumptions  had  to  be  believed  axiomatically;  analytical  philosophy  has

learned  mainly  through  Kant’s  critical  philosophy  to  discover  genuine

problems in questions previously utilized only by skeptics in order to deny

the possibility of knowledge. These questions became the central problems of

epistemology.  For  two  thousand  years  the  criticism  of  the  axiomatic

construction has remained within the frame of mathematical questions, the

elaboration of which, however, led to peculiar discoveries, and eventually

called for a return to philosophical investigations.

The  mathematical  question  concerned  the  reducibility  of  the  axiomatic

system,  i.e.,  the  problem  whether  Euclid’s  axioms  represented  ultimate

propositions  or  whether  there  was  a  possibility  of  reducing  them  to  still

simpler and more self-evident statements. Since the individual axioms were

quite  different  in  character  with  respect  to  their  immediacy,  the  question

arose whether some of the more complicated axioms might be conceived as

consequences of the simpler ones, i.e., whether they could be included among

the theorems. In particular, the demonstrability of the axiom of the parallels

was investigated. This axiom states that through a given point there is oneand only one parallel to a given straight line (which does not go through the

given point), i.e., one straight line which lies in the same plane with the first

one and does not intersect it. At first glance this axiom appears to be self-

evident.  There  is,  however,  something  unsatisfactory  about  it,  because  it

contains a statement about infinity; the assertion that the two lines do not

intersect  within  a  finite  distance  transcends  all  possible  experience.  The

demonstrability of this axiom would have enhanced the certainty of geometry

to  a  great  extent,  and  the  history  of  mathematics  tells  us  that  excellent

mathematicians  from  Proclus  to  Gauss  have  tried  in  vain  to  solve  the

problem.

A new turn was given to the question through the discovery that it was

possible to do without the axiom of parallels altogether. Instead of proving its

truth the opposite method was employed: it was demonstrated that this axiom

could  be  dispensed  with.  Although  the  existence  of  several  parallels  to  a

given line through one point contradicts the human power of visualization,

this assumption could be introduced as an axiom, and a consistent geometry

could  be  developed  in  combination  with  Euclid’s  other  axioms.  This

discovery was made almost simultaneously in the twenties of the last century

by the Hungarian, Bolyai, and the Russian, Lobatschewsky; Gauss is said to

have conceived the idea somewhat earlier without publishing it.

But what can we make of a geometry that assumes the opposite of the

axiom  of  the  parallels?  In  order  to  understand  the  possibility  of  a  non-

Euclidean geometry, it must be remembered that the axiomatic construction

furnishes the proof of a statement in terms of logical derivations from the

axioms alone. The drawing of a figure is only a means to assist visualization,

but  is  never  used  as  a  factor  in  the  proof;  we  know  that  a  proof  is  also

possible by the help of “badly-drawn” figures in which so-called congruent

triangles have sides obviously different in length. It is not the immediate

picture of the figure, but a concatenation of logical relations that compels us

to accept the proof. This consideration holds equally well for non-Euclidean

geometry; although the drawing looks like a “ badly-drawn ” figure, we can

with its help discover whether the logical requirements have been satisfied,

just  as  we  can  do  in  Euclidean  geometry.  This  is  why  non-Euclidean

geometry has been developed from its inception in an axiomatic construction;

in contradistinction to Euclidean geometry where the theorems were known

first  and  the  axiomatic  foundation  was  developed  later,  the  axiomaticconstruction was the instrument of discovery in non-Euclidean geometry.

  With  this  consideration,  which  was  meant  only  to  make  non-Euclidean

geometry  plausible,  we  touch  upon  the  problem  of  the visualization  of

geometry.  Since  this  question  will  be  treated  at  greater  length  in  a  later

section, the remark about “badly-drawn” figures should be taken as a passing

comment. What was intended was to stress the fact that the essence of a

geometrical  proof  is  contained  in  the  logic  of  its  derivations,  not  in  the

proportions  of  the  figures.  Non-Euclidean  geometry  is  a  logically

constructible system—this was the first and most important result established

by its inventors.

It  is  true  that  a  strict  proof  was  still  missing.  No  contradictions  were

encountered—yet  did  this  mean  that  none  would  be  encountered  in  the

future?  This  question  constitutes  the  fundamental  problem  concerning  an

axiomatically  constructed  logical  system.  It  is  to  be  expected  that  non-

Euclidean statements directly contradict those of Euclidean geometry; one

must not be surprised if, for instance, the sum of the angles of a triangle is

found  to  be  smaller  than  two  right  angles.  This  contradiction  follows

necessarily from the reformulation of the axiom of the parallels. What is to be

required is that the new geometrical system be self-consistent. The possibility

can  be  imagined  that  a  statement a,  proved  within  the  non-Euclidean

axiomatic  system,  is  not  tenable  in  a  later  development,  i.e.,  that  the

statement not-a as well as the statement a is provable in the axiomatic system.

It  was  incumbent  upon  the  early  adherents  of  non-Euclidean  geometry,

therefore, to prove that such a contradiction could never happen.

                                                                  3
The proof was furnished to a certain extent by Klein‘s Euclidean model of

non-Euclidean geometry. Klein succeeded in coordinating the concepts of

Euclidean  geometry,  its  points,  straight  lines,  and  planes,  its  concept  of

congruence, etc., to the corresponding concepts of non-Euclidean geometry,

so that every statement of one geometry corresponds to a statement of the

other. If in non-Euclidean geometry a statement a and also a statement not-a

could be proved, the same would hold for the coordinated statements a′ and

not-a′  of  Euclidean  geometry;  a  contradiction  in  non-Euclidean  geometry

would entail a corresponding contradiction in Euclidean geometry. The result

was  a  proof  of  consistency,  the  first  in  the  history  of  mathematics  :  it

proceeds  by  reducing  a  new  system  of  statements  to  an  earlier  one,  the
                                                            4
consistency of which is regarded as virtually certain.  After these investigations by Klein the mathematical significance of non-
                                            5
Euclidean geometry was recognized.  Compared with the natural geometry

of Euclid, that of Bolyai and Lobatschewsky appeared strange and artificial;

but its mathematical legitimacy was beyond question. It turned out later that

another  kind  of  non-Euclidean  geometry  was  possible.  The  axiom  of  the

parallels in Euclidean geometry asserts that to a given straight line through a

given point there exists exactly one parallel; apart from the device used by

Bolyai and Lobatschewsky to deny this axiom by assuming the existence of

several parallels, there was a third possibility, that of denying the existence of

any  parallel.  However,  in  order  to  carry  through  this  assumption
            6
consistently, a certain change in a number of Euclid’s other axioms referring

to the infinity of a straight line was required. By the help of these changes it

became possible to carry through this new type of non-Euclidean geometry.

As  a  result  of  these  developments  there  exists  not  one  geometry  but  a

plurality  of  geometries.  With  this  mathematical  discovery,  the

epistemological  problem  of  the  axioms  was  given  a  new  solution.  If

mathematics is not required to use certain systems of axioms, but is in a

position to employ the axiom not-a as well as the axiom a, then the assertion

a does not belong in mathematics, and mathematics is solely the science of

implication,  i.e.,  of  relations  of  the  form  “if  ...  then”;  consequently,  for

geometry as a mathematical science, there is no problem concerning the truth

of the axioms. This apparently unsolvable problem turns out to be a pseudo-

problem. The axioms are not true or false, but arbitrary statements. It was

soon discovered that the other axioms could be treated in the same way as the

axiom of the parallels. “Non-Archimedian,” “non-Pascalian,” etc., geometries

were constructed; a more detailed exposition will be found in § 14.

  These considerations leave us with the problem into which discipline the

question of the truth of the assertion a should be incorporated. Nobody can

deny  that  we  regard  this  statement  as  meaningful;  common  sense  is

convinced  that  real  space,  the  space  in  which  we  live  and  move  around,

corresponds to the axioms of Euclid and that with respect to this space a is

true, while not-a is false. The discussion of this statement leads away from

mathematics; as a question about a property of the physical world, it is a

physical question, not a mathematical one. This distinction, which grew out

of the discovery of non-Euclidean geometry, has a fundamental significance:

it divides the problem of space into two parts; the problem of mathematicalspace is recognized as different from the problem of physical space.

It will be readily understood that the philosophical insight into the twofold

nature of space became possible only after mathematics had made the step

from Euclid’s geometry to non-Euclidean geometries. Up to that time physics

had  assumed  the  axioms  of  geometry  as  the  self-evident  basis  of  its

description  of  nature.  If  several  kinds  of  geometries  were  regarded  as

mathematically equivalent, the question arose which of these geometries was

applicable to physical reality; there is no necessity to single out Euclidean

geometry for this purpose. Mathematics shows a variety of possible forms of

relations among which physics selects the real one by means of observations

and experiments. Mathematics, for instance, teaches how the planets would

move if the force of attraction of the sun should decrease with the second or

third or nth power of the distance; physics decides that the second power

holds in the real world. With respect to geometry there had been a difference;

only one kind of geometry had been developed and the problem of choice

among geometries had not existed. After the discoveries of non-Euclidean

geometries  the  duality  of physical  and possible  space  was  recognized.

Mathematics reveals the possible spaces; physics decides which among them

corresponds  to  physical  space.  In  contrast  to  all  earlier  conceptions,  in

particular to the philosophy of Kant, it becomes now a task of physics to

determine  the  geometry  of  physical  space,  just  as  physics  determines  the

shape of the earth or the motions of the planets, by means of observations and

experiments.

But what methods should physics employ in order to come to a decision?

The answer to this question will at the same time supply an answer to the

question why we are justified in speaking of a specific physical space. Before

this problem can be investigated more closely, another aspect of geometry

will have to be discussed. For physics the analytic treatment of geometry

became even more fruitful than the axiomatic one.


§ 2. RIEMANNIAN GEOMETRY

  Riemann’s extension of the concept of space did not start from the axiom

of the parallels, but centered around the concept of metric.

  Riemann developed further a discovery by Gauss according to which the

shape of a curved surface can be characterized by the geometry within the

surface. Let us illustrate Gauss’ idea as follows. We usually characterize thecurvature of the surface of a sphere by its deviation from the plane; if we hold

a plane against the sphere it touches only at one point; at all other points the

distances  between  plane  and  sphere  become  larger  and  larger.  This

description characterizes the curvature of the surface of the sphere “from the

outside”; the distances between the plane and the surface of the sphere lie

outside the surface and the decision about the curvature has to make use of

the third dimension, which alone establishes the difference between curved

and straight. Is it possible to determine the curvature of the surface of the

sphere without taking outside measurements? Is it meaningful to distinguish

the curved surface from the plane within two dimensions? Gauss showed that

such  a  distinction  is  indeed  possible.  If  we  were  to  pursue  “practical

geometry” on the sphere, by surveying, for instance, with small measuring

rods, we should find out very soon that we were living on a curved surface.

For the ratio of circumference u and diameter d of a circle we would obtain a

number smaller than π = 3.14... as is shown in Fig. 1. Since we stay on the

surface all the time, we would not measure the “real diameter” which cuts

through the inner part of the sphere, but the “curved diameter” which lies on

the  surface  of  the  sphere  and  is  longer.  This  diameter  divided  into  the

circumference  results  in  a  number  smaller  than π.  Nevertheless,  it  is

meaningful to call the point M “the center of the circle on the surface of the

sphere” because it has the same distance from every point of the circle; that

we find ourselves on a sphere is noticed by means of the deviation of the ratio

from π. In this way we obtain a geometry of a spherical surface which is

distinguished from the ordinary geometry by the fact that different metrical

relations hold for this kind of geometry. In addition to the change in the ratio

between  circumference  and  diameter  of  a  circle,  an  especially  important

feature is that the sum of the angles of a triangle on a sphere is greater than

180°.









3
/.\o
Fig. 1. Circumference and diameter of a circle on the surface of a sphere.It  is  remarkable  that  this  generalization  of  plane  geometry  to  surface

geometry is identical with that generalization of geometry which originated

from the analysis of the axiom of the parallels. The leading role which has

been ascribed to the axiom of the parallels in the course of the development

of geometrical axiomatics cannot be justified from a purely axiomatic point

of view; the construction of non-Euclidean geometries could have been based

equally well upon the elimination of other axioms. It was perhaps due to an

intuitive feeling for theoretical fruitfulness that the criticism always centered

around the axiom of the parallels. For in this way the axiomatic basis was

created for that extension of geometry in which the metric appears as an
                            7
independent  variable.   Once  the  significance  of  the  metric  as  the

characteristic feature of the plane has been recognized from the viewpoint of

Gauss’ plane theory, it is easy to point out, conversely, its connection with

the  axiom  of  the  parallels.  The  property  of  the  straight  line  of  being  the

shortest connection between two points can be transferred to curved surfaces,

and leads to the concept of straightest line; on the surface of the sphere the

great  circles  play  the  role  of  the  shortest  line  of  connection,  and  on  this

surface  their  significance  is  analogous  to  that  of  the  straight  lines  on  the

plane.  Yet  while  the  great  circles  as  “straight  lines”  share  their  most

important property with those of the plane, they are distinct from the latter

with  respect  to  the  axiom  of  the  parallels:  all  great  circles  of  the  sphere

intersect and therefore there are no parallels among these “straight lines”.

Here we encounter the second possibility of a denial (cf. § 1) of the axiom of

the parallels which excludes the existence of parallels. If this idea is carried

through, and all axioms are formulated on the understanding that by “straight

lines” are meant the great circles of the sphere and by “plane” is meant the

surface of the sphere, it turns out that this system of elements satisfies a

system of axioms within two dimensions which is nearly identical in all of its

statements  with  the  axiomatic  system  of  Euclidean  geometry; the  only
                                                                    8
exception is the formulation of the axiom of the parallels. The geometry of

the spherical surface can be viewed as the realization of a two-dimensional

non-Euclidean geometry: the denial of the axiom of the parallels singles out

that generalization of geometry which occurs in the transition from the plane

to the curved surface.

  Once this result has been recognized for two-dimensional structures, a new

kind  of  insight  is  gained  into  the  corresponding  problem  of  several

dimensions  by  means  of  a  combination  of  the  two  different  points  ofdeparture.  The  axiomatic  development  of  non-Euclidean  geometry  had

already  been  achieved  for  three-dimensional  structures  and  therefore

constituted an extension of three-dimensional space analogous to the relation

of the plane to the curved surface. Although Euclidean space contains curved

surfaces,  it  does  not  embody  the  degree  of  logical  generalization  that

characterizes  the  surfaces;  it  can  realize  only  the  Euclidean  axiom  of  the

parallels, not the axioms contradicting the latter. This fact suggests a concept

of  space  which  contains  the  plane  Euclidean  space  as  a  special  case,  but

includes  all  non-Euclidean  spaces  too.  Such  a  concept  of  space  in  three

dimensions is analogous to the concept of surface in two dimensions; it has

the same relation to Euclidean space as a surface has to the plane.

On the basis of these ideas Riemann could give so generalized a definition

to the concept of space that it includes not only Euclidean space but also

Lobatschewsky’s  space  as  special  cases.  According  to  Riemann,  space  is

merely  a  three-dimensional  manifold;  the  question  is  left  open  which

axiomatic systems will hold for it. Riemann showed that it is not necessary to

develop an axiomatic system in order to find the different types of space; it is

more  convenient  to  use  an  analytic  procedure  analogous  to  the  method

developed by Gauss for the theory of surfaces. The geometry of space is

established  in  terms  of  six  functions,  the metrical  coefficients  of  the  line
                                        9
element,  which  must  be  given   as  a  function  of  the  coordinate;  the

manipulation of these functions replaces geometrical considerations, and all

properties of geometry can be expressed analytically. This procedure can be

likened to the method in elementary analytic geometry which establishes an

equivalence between a formula with two or three variables and a curve or a

surface. The imagination is thus given conceptual support that carries it to

new discoveries. In analogy to the auxiliary concept of the curvature of a

surface, which is measured by the reciprocal product of the main radii of

curvature, Riemann introduced the auxiliary concept of curvature of space,

which is a much more complicated mathematical structure. Euclidean space,

then,  has  a  curvature  of  degree  zero  in  analogy  to  the  plane,  which  is  a

surface  of  zero  curvature.  Euclidean  space  occupies  the  middle  ground

between the spaces of positive and negative curvatures: it can be shown that

this classification corresponds to the three possible forms of the axiom of the

parallels. In the space of positive curvature no parallel to a given straight line

exists;  in  the  space  of  zero  curvature one  parallel  exists;  in  the  space  of

negative curvature more than one parallel exists. In general, the curvature ofspace may vary from point to point in a manner similar to the point to point

variation in the curvature of a surface; but the spaces of constant curvature

have a special significance. The space of constant negative curvature is that

of  Bolyai-Lobatschewsky  ;  the  space  of  constant  zero  curvature  is  the

Euclidean space; the space of constant positive curvature is called spherical,

because it is the three-dimensional analogue to the surface of the sphere. The

analytical method of Riemann has led to the discovery of more types of space

than the synthetic method of Bolyai and Lobatschewsky, which led only to

certain  spaces  of  constant  curvature.  Modern  mathematics  treats  all  these

types of space on equal terms and develops and manipulates their properties

as easily as those of Euclidean geometry.


§ 3. THE PROBLEM OF PHYSICAL GEOMETRY

Let us now return to the question asked at the end of § 1. The geometry of

physical space had to be recognized as an empirical problem; it is the task of

physics to single out the actual space, i.e., physical space, among the possible

types of space. It can decide this question only by empirical means: but how

should it proceed?

The  method  for  this  investigation  is  given  by  Riemann’s  mathematical

procedure: the decision must be brought about by practical measurements in

space. In a similar way as the inhabitants of a spherical surface can find out

its spherical character by taking measurements, just as we humans found out

about  the  spherical  shape  of  our  earth  which  we  cannot  view  from  the

outside,  it  must  be  possible  to  find  out,  by  means  of  measurements,  the

geometry  of  the  space  in  which  we  live. There  is  a  geodetic  method  of

measuring space analogous to the method of measuring the surface of the

earth.  However,  it  would  be  rash  to  make  this  assertion  without  further

qualification. For a clearer understanding of the problem we must once more

return to the example of the plane.o]

Ao
          Fig. 2. Projection of a non-Euclidean geometry on a plane.



Let us imagine (Fig. 2) a big hemisphere made of glass which merges

gradually into a huge glass plane; it looks like a surface G consisting of a

plane with a hump. Human beings climbing around on this surface would be

able to determine its shape by geometrical measurements. They would very

soon know that their surface is plane in the outer domains but that it has a

hemispherical hump in the middle; they would arrive at this knowledge by

noting  the  differences  between  their  measurements  and  two-dimensional

Euclidean geometry.

An opaque plane E is located below the surface G parallel to its plane part.

Vertical light rays strike it from above, casting shadows of all objects on the

glass surface upon the plane. Every measuring rod which the G-people are

using throws a shadow upon the plane; we would say that these shadows

suffer  deformations  in  the  middle  area.  The G-people would measure the

distances A′B′ and B′C′ as equal in length, but the corresponding distances of

their shadows AB and BC would be called unequal.

Let us assume that the plane E is also inhabited by human beings and let us

add another strange assumption. On the plane a mysterious force varies the

length  of  all  measuring  rods  moved  about  in  that  plane,  so  that  they  are

always  equal  in  length  to  the  corresponding  shadows  projected  from  the

surface G. Not only the measuring rods, however, but all objects, such as all

the other measuring instruments and the bodies of the people themselves, are

affected in the same way; these people, therefore, cannot directly perceive

this change. What kind of measurements would the E-people obtain? In the

outer areas of the plane nothing would be changed, since the distance P′Q′

would be projected in equal length on PQ. But the middle area which lies

below  the  glass  hemisphere  would  not  furnish  the  usual  measurements.

Obviously the same results would be obtained as those found in the middle

region by the G-people. Assume that the two worlds do not know anything

about each other, and that there is no outside observer able to look at the

surface E—what would the E-people assert about the shape of their surface?

  They would certainly say the same as the G-people, i.e., that they live on a

plane having a hump in the middle. They would not notice the deformation of

their measuring rods. But why would they not notice this deformation?We can easily imagine it to be caused by a physical factor, for instance by

a source of heat under the plane E, the effects of which are concentrated in

the middle area. It expands the measuring rods so that they become too long

when they approach A. Geometrical relations similar to those we assumed

would be realized; the distances CB and BA would be covered by the same

measuring rod and heat would be the mysterious force we imagined.

But could the E-people discover this force? Before we answer this question

we  have  to  formulate  it  more  precisely.  If  the E-people  knew  that  their

surface  is  really  a  plane,  they  could,  of  course,  notice  the  force  by  the

discrepancy between their observed geometry and Euclidean plane geometry.

The  question,  therefore,  should  read:  how  can  the  effect  of  the  force  be

discovered if the nature of the geometry is not known? Or better still: how

can the force be detected if the nature of the geometry may not be used as an

indicator?

If heat were the affecting force, direct indications of its presence could be

found which would not make use of geometry as an indirect method. The E-

people would discover the heat by means of their sense of temperature. But

they would be able to demonstrate the heat expansion independently of this

sensation,  due  to  the  fact  that  heat  affects  different  materials  in  different

ways.  Thus  the E-people  would  obtain  one  geometry  when  using  copper

measuring rods and another when using wooden measuring rods. In this way

they would notice the existence of a force. Indeed, direct evidence for the

presence  of  heat  is  based  on  the  fact  that  it  affects  different  materials  in

different ways. The fact that the difference in temperature at the points A and

C is demonstrable by the help of a thermometer is based on this phenomenon;

if the mercury did not expand more than the glass tube and the scale of the

thermometer,  the  instrument  would  show  the  same  reading  at  all

temperatures. Even the physiological effect of heat upon the human body

depends upon differences in the reactions of different nerve endings to heat

stimuli.

Heat as a force can thus be demonstrated directly. The forces, however,

which we introduced in our example, cannot be demonstrated directly. They

have two properties:

 

1. They affect all materials in the same way.

2. There are no insulating walls.We have discussed the first property, but the second one is also necessary if

the deformation is to be taken as a purely metrical one; it will be presented at

greater  length  in  §  5.  For  the  sake  of  completeness  the  definition  of  the

insulating wall may be added here: it is a covering made of any kind of

material  which  does  not  act  upon  the  enclosed  object  with  forces  having

property a. Let us call the forces which have the properties a and b universal

forces; all other forces are called differential forces. Then it can be said that

only differential forces, but not universal forces, are directly demonstrable.

  After  these  considerations,  what  can  be  stated  about  the  shape  of  the

surfaces E and G? G has been described as a surface with a hump and E as a

plane  which  appears  to  have  a  hump.  By  what  right  do  we  make  this

assertion? The measuring results are the same on both surfaces. If we restrict

ourselves to these results, we may just as well say that G is the surface with

the “illusion” of the hump and E the surface with the “real” hump. Or perhaps

both surfaces have a hump. In our example we assumed from the beginning

that E  was  a  plane  and G  a  surface  with  a  hump.  By  what  right  do  we

distinguish between E and G? Does E differ in any respect from G?

  These considerations raise a strange question. We began by asking for the

actual geometry of a real surface. We end with the question: Is it meaningful

to assert geometrical differences with respect to real surfaces? This peculiar

indeterminacy  of  the  problem  of  physical  geometry  is  an  indication  that

something was omitted in the formulation of the problem. We forgot that a

unique answer can only be found if the question has been stated exhaustively.

Evidently some assumption is missing. Since the determination of geometry

depends on the question whether or not two distances are really equal in

length (the distances AB and BC in Fig. 2), we have to know beforehand what

it  means  to  say  that  two  distances  are  “really  equal.”  Is really  equal  a

meaningful concept? We have seen that it is impossible to settle this question

if we admit universal forces. Is it, then, permissible to ask the question?

Let  us  therefore  inquire  into  the  epistemological  assumptions  of

measurement. For this purpose an indispensable concept, which has so far

been  overlooked  by  philosophy,  must  be  introduced.  The  concept  of  a

coordinative definition is essential for the solution of our problem.


§ 4. COORDINATIVE DEFINITIONS

  Defining usually means reducing a concept to other concepts. In physics,as in all other fields of inquiry, wide use is made of this procedure. There is a

second  kind  of  definition,  however,  which  is  also  employed  and  which

derives from the fact that physics, in contradistinction to mathematics, deals

with  real  objects.  Physical  knowledge  is  characterized  by  the  fact  that

concepts are not only defined by other concepts, but are also coordinated to

real  objects.  This  coordination  cannot  be  replaced  by  an  explanation  of

meanings, it simply states that this concept is coordinated to this particular

thing. In general this coordination is not arbitrary. Since the concepts are

interconnected by testable relations, the coordination may be verified as true

or false, if the requirement of uniqueness is added, i.e., the rule that the same

concept must always denote the same object. The method of physics consists
                                                                          10
in establishing the uniqueness of this coordination, as Schlick  has clearly

shown. But certain preliminary coordinations must be determined before the

method  of  coordination  can  be  carried  through  any  further;  these  first

coordinations  are  therefore  definitions  which  we  shall  call coordinative

definitions. They are arbitrary, like all definitions; on their choice depends

the conceptual system which develops with the progress of science.

  Wherever metrical relations are to be established, the use of coordinative

definitions is conspicuous. If a distance is to be measured, the unit of length

has  to  be  determined  beforehand  by  definition.  This  definition  is  a

coordinative  definition.  Here  the  duality  of  conceptual  definition  and

coordinative definition can easily be seen. We can define only by means of

other concepts what we mean by a unit; for instance: “A unit is a distance

which, when transported along another distance, supplies the measure of this

distance.” But this statement does not say anything about the size of the unit,

which can only be established by reference to a physically given length such

as  the  standard  meter  in  Paris.  The  same  consideration  holds  for  other

definitions of units. If the definition reads, for instance: “A meter is the forty-

millionth part of the circumference of the earth,” this circumference is the

physical length to which the definition refers by means of the insertion of

some further concepts. And if the wave-length of cadmium light is chosen as

a unit, cadmium light is the physical phenomenon to which the definition is

related. It will be noticed in this example that the method of coordinating a

unit to a physical object may be very complicated. So far nobody has seen a

wave-length;  only  certain  phenomena  have  been  observed  which  are

theoretically related to it, such as the light and dark bands resulting from

interference.  In  principle,  a  unit  of  length  can  be  defined  in  terms  of  anobservation that does not include any metrical relations, such as “that wave-

length which occurs when light has a certain redness.” In this case a sample

of this red color would have to be kept in Paris in place of the standard meter.

The characteristic feature of this method is the coordination of a concept to a

physical  object.  These  considerations  explain  the  term  “coordinative

definition.” If the definition is used for measurements, as in the case of the

unit of length, it is a metrical coordinative definition.

The philosophical significance of the theory of relativity consists in the

fact  that  it  has  demonstrated  the  necessity  for  metrical  coordinative

definitions in several places where empirical relations had previously been

assumed. It is not always as obvious as in the case of the unit of length that a

coordinative definition is required before any measurements can be made,

and pseudo-problems arise if we look for truth where definitions are needed.

The word “relativity” is intended to express the fact that the results of the

measurements depend upon the choice of the coordinative definitions. It will

be  shown  presently  how  this  idea  affects  the  solution  of  the  problem  of

geometry.

  After this solution of the problem of the unit of length, the next step leads

to  the  comparison  of  two  units  of  lengths  at  different  locations.  If  the

measuring rod is laid down, its length is compared only to that part of a body,

say a wall, which it covers at the moment. If two separate parts of the wall are

to be compared, the measuring rod will have to be transported. It is assumed

that  the  measuring  rod  does  not  change  during  the  transport.  It  is

fundamentally impossible, however, to detect such a change if it is produced

by universal forces. Assume two measuring rods which are equal in length.

They are transported by different paths to a distant place; there again they are

aid down side by side and found equal in length. Does this procedure prove

that they did not change on the way? Such an assumption would be incorrect.

The only observable fact is that the two measuring rods are always equal in

length  at  the  place  where  they  are  compared  to  each  other.  But  it  is

impossible to know whether on the way the two rods expand or contract. An

expansion that affects all bodies in the same way is not observable because a

direct comparison of measuring rods at different places is impossible.

An optical comparison, for instance by measuring the angular perspective

of each rod with a theodolite, cannot help either. The experiment makes use

of light rays and the interpretation of the measurement of the lengths dependson assumptions about the propagation of light.

The  problem  does  not  concern  a  matter  of cognition  but  of definition.

There is no way of knowing whether a measuring rod retains its length when

it  is  transported  to  another  place;  a  statement  of  this  kind  can  only  be

introduced by a definition. For this purpose a coordinative definition is to be

used, because two physical objects distant from each other are defined as

equal in length. It is not the concept equality of length which is to be defined,

but a real object corresponding to it is to be pointed out. A physical structure

is coordinated to the concept equality of length, just as the standard meter is

coordinated to the concept unit of length.

This  analysis  reveals  how  definitions  and  empirical  statements  are

interconnected. As explained above, it is an observational fact, formulated in

an empirical statement, that two measuring rods which are shown to be equal

in length by local comparison made at a certain space point will be found

equal in length by local comparison at every other space point, whether they

have been transported along the same or different paths. When we add to this

empirical fact the definition that the rods shall be called equal in length when

they are at different places, we do not make an inference from the observed

fact; the addition constitutes an independent convention. There is, however, a

certain relation between the two. The physical fact makes the convention

unique, i.e., independent of the path of transportation. The statement about

the uniqueness of the convention is therefore empirically verifiable and not a

matter of choice. One can say that the factual relations holding for a local

comparison of rods, though they do not require the definition of congruence

in terms of transported rods, make this definition admissible. Definitions that

are not unique are inadmissible in a scientific system.

This consideration can only mean that the factual relations may be used for

the  simple  definition  of  congruence  where  any  rigid  measuring  rod

establishes the congruence. If the factual relations did not hold, a special

definition of the unit of length would have to be given for every space point.

Not only at Paris, but also at every other place a rod having the length of a

“meter” would have to be displayed, and all these arbitrarily chosen rods

would be called equal in length by definition. The requirement of uniformity

would be satisfied by carrying around a measuring rod selected at random for

the purpose of making copies and displaying these as the unit. If two of these

copies were transported and compared locally, they would be different inlength, but this fact would not “ falsify” the definition. In such a world it

would become very obvious that the concept of congruence is a definition;

but we, in our simple world, are also permitted to choose a definition of

congruence that does not correspond to the actual behavior of rigid rods.

Thus we could arrange measuring rods, which in the ordinary sense are called

equal in length, and, laying them end to end, call the second rod half as long

as the first, the third one a third, etc. Such a definition would complicate all

measurements,  but  epistemologically  it  is  equivalent  to  the  ordinary

definition, which calls the rods equal in length. In this statement we make use

of the fact that the definition of a unit at only one space point does not render

general measurements possible. For the general case the definition of the unit
                                                                                          11
has to be given in advance as a function of the place (and also of the time).

It is again a matter of fact that our world admits of a sample definition. of

congruence because of the factual relations holding for the behavior of rigid

rods; but this fact does not deprive the simple definition of its definitional

character.

The great significance of the realization that congruence is a matter of

definition  lies  in  the  fact  that  by  its  help  the  epistemological  problem  of

geometry is solved. The determination of the geometry of a certain structure

depends on the definition of congruence. In the example of the surface E the

question arose whether or not the distances AB and BC are equal; in the first

case the surface E will have the same geometrical form as the surface G, in

the second case it will be a plane. The answer to this question can now be

given in terms of the foregoing analysis: whether AB = BC is not a matter of

cognition  but  of  definition.  If  in E  the  congruence  of  widely  separated

distances is defined in such a way that AB = BC, E will be a surface with a

hump in the middle; if the definition reads differently, E will be a plane. The

geometrical form of a body is no absolute datum of experience, but depends

on a preceding coordinative definition; depending on the definition, the same

structure may be called a plane, or a sphere, or a curved surface. Just as the

measure of the height of a tower does not constitute an absolute number, but

depends on the choice of the unit of length, or as the height of a mountain is

only defined when the zero level above which the measurements are to be

taken is indicated, geometrical shape is determined only after a preceding

definition. This requirement holds for the three-dimensional domain in the

same way as it does for the two-dimensional. While in the two-dimensional

case the observed non-Euclidean geometry can be interpreted as the geometryof a curved surface in a Euclidean three-dimensional space, we arrive at a

three-dimensional  non-Euclidean  geometry  when  we  measure  a  three-

dimensional structure. A simple consideration will clarify this point. Let us

choose as our coordinative definition that of practical surveying, i.e., let us

define rigid measuring rods as congruent, when transported. If under these

conditions a large circle, say with a radius of 100 meters, is measured on the

surface of the earth, a very exact measurement will furnish a number smaller

than π = 3.14... for the relation of circumference and diameter. This result is

due  to  the  curvature  of  the  surface  of  the  earth,  which  prevents  us  from

measuring  the  real  diameter  going  through  the  earth  below  the  curved

surface. In this case it would be possible to use the third dimension. If we add

the  third  dimension,  however,  the  situation  becomes  different.  Imagine  a

large sphere made of tin which is supported on the inside by rigid iron beams;

on the sphere and upon the iron scaffold people are climbing around who are

measuring  circumference  and  diameter  at  different  points  with  the  same

measuring  rods  they  used  for  the  two-dimensional  case.  If  this  time  the

measuring result deviates from π, we must accept a three-dimensional non-

Euclidean geometry which can no longer be interpreted as the curvature of a

surface in three-dimensional Euclidean space. We obtain this result because

the coordinative definition of congruence was chosen as indicated above. A

different geometry would have been obtained, if we had used, for instance,

the coordinative definition of the earlier example, in which we called the

measuring rod half its length after putting it down twice, a third its length

after putting it down three times, etc. The question of the geometry of real

space,  therefore,  cannot  be  answered  before  the  coordinative  definition  is

given which establishes the congruence for this space.

We are now left with the problem: which coordinative definition should be

used for physical space? Since we need a geometry, a decision has to be

made for a definition of congruence. Although we must do so, we should

never forget that we deal with an arbitrary decision that is neither true nor

false.  Thus  the  geometry  of  physical  space  is  not  an  immediate  result  of

experience, but depends on the choice of the coordinative definition.

In this connection we shall look for the most adequate definition, i.e., one

which has the advantage of logical simplicity and requires the least possible

change in the results of science. The sciences have implicitly employed such

a  coordinative  definition  all  the  time,  though  not  always  consciously;  theresults based upon this definition will be developed further in our analysis. It

can  be  assumed  that  the  definition  hitherto  employed  possesses  certain

practical advantages justifying its use. In the discussion about the definition

of congruence by means of rigid rods, this coordinative definition has already

been indicated. The investigation is not complete, however, because an exact

definition of the rigid body is still missing.


§ 5. RIGID BODIES

  Experience  tells  us  that  physical  objects  assume  different  states.  Solid

bodies have an advantage over liquid ones because they change their shape

and  size  only  very  little  when  affected  by  outside  forces.  They  seem,

therefore, to be useful for the definition of congruence. However, if the result

of the previous considerations is kept in mind, this relative stability is no

ground on which to base a preference for solid bodies. As was explained, the

form  and  size  of  an  object  depends  on  the  coordinative  definition  of

congruence;  if  the  solid  body  is  used  for  the  coordinative  definition,  the

statement  that  it  does  not  change  its  shape  must  not  be  regarded  as  a

cognitive statement. It can only be a definition: we define the shape of the

solid body as unchangeable. But how can the solid body be defined? In other

words, if the physical state of being solid were defined differently, under

what conditions would the solid body be called rigid? If the conservation of

shape is not permissible as a criterion, what criteria may be used?

The problem becomes more complicated because we cannot solve it by

merely pointing to certain real objects. Although the standard meter in Paris

was cited previously as the prototype of such a definition, this account was a

somewhat schematic abstraction. Actually no object is the perfect realization

of the rigid body of physics; it must be remembered that such an object may

be influenced by many physical forces. Only after several corrections have

been made, for example, for the influence of temperature and elasticity, is the

resulting  length  of  the  object  regarded  as  adequate  for  the  coordinative

definition of the comparison of lengths. The standard meter in Paris would

not be accepted as the definition of the unit of length, if it were not protected

from  influences  of  temperature,  etc.,  by  being  kept  in  a  vault.  If  an

earthquake should ever throw it out of this vault and deform its diameter,

nobody would want to retain it as the prototype of the meter; everybody

would agree that the standard meter would no longer be a meter. But whatkind of definition is this, if the definition may some day be called false? Does

the concept of coordinative definition become meaningless?

The answer is: it does not become meaningless, but, as we shall see, its

application  is  logically  very  complicated.  The  restrictions  that  affect  the

arbitrariness of the coordinative definition have two sources. One restriction

lies  in  the  demand  that  the  obtained  metric  retain  certain  older  physical

results, especially those of the “physics of daily life.” Nobody could object

on logical grounds if the bent rod would be taken as the definition of the unit

of length; but then we must accept the consequence that our house, our body,

the whole world has become larger. Relative to the coordinative definition it

has, indeed, become larger, but such an interpretation does not correspond to

our habitual thinking. We prefer an interpretation of changes involving an

individual thing on the one side and the rest of the world on the other side

that confines the change to the small object. The theory of motion uses the

same idea; the fly crawling around in the moving train is called “moving”

relative to the train, and the train is called “moving” relative to the earth.

Provided that we realize that such a description cannot be justified on logical

grounds, we can employ it without hesitation because it is more convenient;

yet it must not be regarded as “more true” than any other description. We

must not assume that a deformation of the standard meter by an earthquake is

equivalent to a change in any absolute sense; actually it is only a change in

the difference in size between the rod and the rest of the world. There is, of

course,  no  objection  to  the  use  of  such  restrictions  on  coordinative

definitions,  because  their  only  effect  is  an  adaptation  of  the  scientific

definition to those of everyday life.

  These restrictions are more numerous than might be anticipated offhand.

Geometrical concepts abound in our daily life. We call the floor and ceiling

plane, the corners of our rooms rectangular, a taut string straight. It is clear

that  these  terms  can  only  be  definitions  and  have  nothing  to  do  with

cognition, as one might at first believe. But by means of these definitions we

have arrived at a very simple physics of everyday life. It would logically be

permissible to define the taut string as curved, but then we would have to

introduce a complicated field of force which pulls the string to the side and

prevents it from adjusting itself to the shortest line in spite of the elastic

tension,  comparable  to  a  stretched  chain  bending  under  the  influence  of

gravity;  such  a  convention  would  complicate  physics  unnecessarily.However, this is the only objection that can be raised against this description;

the statement that a taut string is straight is not empirical but only a more

convenient definition.

On the other hand, these restrictions do not constitute strict rules; they

merely confine coordinative definitions to certain limits. Direct observation is

inexact and we admit the possibility of small inaccuracies of observation.

Scientifically speaking nobody will deny that the floor is a little curved, or

that  a  tightened  string  sags  slightly.  Such  a  statement  would  mean  that

science does not really use the floor and the string but other physical objects

as standards for its coordinative definition, and that, compared to these other

things, small deviations occur. The physics of everyday life furnishes only

limits  for  coordinative  definitions;  it  does  not  intend  to  establish  them

strictly.

For  everyday  physics  this  strictness  is  not  possible,  and  the  task  of

scientific physics is therefore to give a strict formulation of the coordinative

definition  within  these  limits.  This  aim  of  precision  is  the  reason  for  the

important role played by correction factors and supplementary forces in the

measurement of lengths. The principle according to which the strict definition

is achieved must now be investigated more closely. What is the rigid body of

physics? It must be defined strictly without the use of the concept of change

in size.

For this purpose the concepts rigid and solid must be distinguished. Solid

bodies  are  bodies  having  a  certain  physical  state  which  can  be  defined

ostensively;  it  differs  from  the  liquid  and  gaseous  state  in  a  number  of

observable  ways.  The  solid  body  can  be  defined  without  the  use  of  the

concept  of  change  in  size.  Rigid  bodies,  however,  are  those  bodies  that

constitute the physical part in the coordinative definition of congruence and

that by definition do not change their size when transported. By the use of the

concept solid body a definition of the concept rigid body can be given that

does not employ congruence.

  Definition: Rigid  bodies  are  solid  bodies  which  are  not  affected  by

differential forces, or concerning which the influence of differential forces

has been eliminated by corrections; universal forces are disregarded.

This definition will be discussed presently. Let us first deal with the last

clause. May we simply neglect universal forces? But we do not neglect them:we merely set the universal forces equal to zero by definition. Without such a

rule  the  rigid  body  cannot  be  defined.  Since  there  is  no  demonstrable

difference produced by universal forces, the conception that the transported

measuring rod is deformed by such forces can always be defended. No object

is rigid relative to universal forces.

This idea corresponds to the usual method of physics. All forces occurring

in physics are differential forces in the sense of our definition. The terms

“physical  forces”  and  “differential  forces”  will  therefore  be  used

interchangeably in the following sections.

We must still discuss the first part of the definition of the rigid body. Again

we shall use the method of the physicist. However, we shall avoid the vicious

circle of defining the absence of exterior forces by an absence of change of

shape.  Since  universal  forces  were  eliminated  by  definition  and  exterior

forces are always demonstrable by differential effects, the conservation of

shape is defined inversely through the lack of exterior forces.

This rule needs an addition. It is not possible, even by computations, to

eliminate  exterior  forces  completely;  small  effects  evade  experimental

observation  and  the  definition  supplies  an  ideal  limit  that  can  only  be

approximated.  The  method  of  approximation  must  therefore  be  discussed.

Solid bodies possess considerable interior forces or tensions. According to

the usual conception, these forces account for resistance against change of

shape; but conversely, in our epistemological construction we can base the

definition of negligible change of shape upon the occurrence of these interior

forces and tensions. Change of shape is called small if the exterior forces are

small  relative  to  the  interior  forces.  The  more  nearly  this  condition  is

realized, the more rigid is the body; but only at the unattainable limit where

the exterior forces disappear relative to the interior forces would the rigid

body be realized in the strict sense.

The  definition  of  the  rigid  body  depends  on  the  definition  of  a closed

system. Here lies the difficulty of the problem. Two critical points have been

evaded by our definition. In the first place, a closed system can never be

strictly realized; therefore, a transition to a limit must be given that permits us

to call a system “ closed to a certain degree of exactness.” This transition to a

limit is obtained through the relation between interior and exterior forces,

which can be made very small by means of technical manipulation. Without

the consideration of interior forces, however, the concept of a closed systemcould not be determined, because there is always a certain connection with

the environment, and it is necessary to name the other magnitudes relative to

which the exterior forces are small. It is, therefore, a necessary condition for a

closed  system  to  contain  interior  forces,  and  even  in  the  transition  to

infinitesimal closed systems, exterior forces must vanish in a higher order

than  the  interior  ones.  The  second  difficulty  in  the  definition  of  closed

systems  lies  in  the  possible  existence  of  forces  not  demonstrable  by

differential measurements because they affect all indicators in the same way.

Physical forces in the sense of our definition can be excluded by adequate

protection;  but  if  there  exist  forces  which  penetrate  all  insulating  walls

(property b, p. 13) there are no closed systems. As universal forces they were

set equal to zero by definition and as such eliminated. Without such a rule a

closed system cannot be defined.

This definition of the rigid body is not explicitly given in the literature of

physics, but it is that definition on which the whole system of physics is

based. With a different definition physical laws would generally change; this

follows  from  the  fact  that  in  the  dimensions  of  the  fundamental  physical

magnitudes, such as force and energy, the concept of length occurs; thus the

values of these magnitudes depend on the definition of congruence. It must

not  be  argued,  however,  that  conversely  the  “truth”  of  our  definition  of

congruence can be inferred from the truth of physical laws. The truth of the

physical laws can only be asserted under the assumption of a definition of

congruence; the laws are true relative to the definition of congruence by

means of rigid bodies. The following example will illustrate this point: if a

rubber band were used as the definition of congruence without any indication

of its state of tension, the energy of closed systems would in general not be

constant, since the measure of the energy would vary as a function of the

rubber  band.  The  kinetic  energy  would  change,  for  instance,  because  the

velocity of the body under consideration would vary with the changes in the

rubber band. The law of conservation of energy would be replaced by a law

stating the dependence of the energy of closed systems on the state of the

rubber band. But this law would be just as true as the law of the conservation

of energy. The disadvantage would consist only in the fact that the biography

of the rubber band would have to be included in all physical laws. It is one of

the most important facts of natural science that it is possible to establish

physical laws free from such complications; the significance of the rigid body

is based on it.§ 6. THE DISTINCTION BETWEEN UNIVERSAL AND

DIFFERENTIAL FORCES

Our  definition  of  the  rigid  body  is  based  mainly  upon  the  distinction

between universal and differential forces. When we used heat as a differential

force in our example above, we could show that a direct proof of physical

forces  is  possible  because  of  the  difference  of  their  effects  on  different

materials.  This  idea  must  be  elaborated  further.  The  thermometer  works

because mercury and glass do not have the same coefficient of expansion.

But  can  differences  in  temperature  be  demonstrated  only  by  differences

between the reactions of various materials to heat?

  When we recall how the coefficient of expansion of a rod is measured in

practice, another possibility suggests itself. For this measurement a device is

used  as  shown  in Fig. 3.  The  distance ED  corresponds  to  the  rod  to  be

measured. The end D is pressed firmly against the support; the end E can

move freely. Before the rod is heated, its length is equal to the distance AD.

The heat is applied only to ED, while BC is kept at its initial temperature;

thus the interval AD remains constant, while ED changes its length. E will

move to the left beyond A. The influence of the heat is observable because A

and E  no  longer  coincide.  This  effect  is  observable,  even  if  the  whole

apparatus consists of the same material. Imagine a copper wire bent in the

rectangular shape of Fig. 3; the two ends of the wire meet in A and E. Such a

device would be a “thermometer”, because it would be possible to observe a

change in temperature by the disappearance of the coincidence between A

and E. Here the force is measured by an indicator made of only one material.









  Fig. 3. Sketch of an apparatus for the measurement of heat expansion.



  Such a device can serve quite generally to demonstrate the presence of

forces; the indicator of the force will always react when the field of force isnot homogeneous, i.e., if it affects the different parts of the wire in different

ways. The field of force may fill the space continuously ; if a measurement is

to be taken in the field of heat, a complete insulation of the rod DE from the

support, i.e., a discontinuity of the field of temperature, is not necessary for

the qualitative demonstration of the expansion.

The indicator can have yet another form that makes its operation even

more obvious. Imagine a circle made of wire with a diameter of the same

material (Fig. 4). At P this diameter is fastened to the circle, at Q the point S

touches the ring, so that there is a coincidence between Q and S. Such an

apparatus will also demonstrate the existence of higher temperature in the

middle of the circle, for then Q will not coincide with S. The device can be

used for other purposes, too. If it were moved along an egg-shaped surface so

that the wire were everywhere in contact with the surface, Q would no longer

coincide with S. The indicator points out directly the curvature of the surface

by comparing circumference and diameter of a circle. Applied to surfaces of

variable curvature, such as an egg-shaped surface, the indicator will register

the curvature.















        Fig. 4. Sketch of an indicator for the geometrical curvature.



Here we have an indicator of geometrical relations, and we notice that

evidence of a field of heat is furnished by a geometrical method. From the

change of the geometry we infer the presence of the field of heat. We did not

exclude  the  possibility  of  this  inference;  we  must,  however,  analyze  the

question why, in this case, we go beyond the observation of the geometry,and infer a deforming force. Again we answer that the different reactions of

the different kinds of material lead to this inference. In a field of heat the

points Q and S on a copper indicator would be shifted in a different way than

on an indicator made of iron wire; on an egg-shaped surface both would show

the same differences. Thus the only distinguishing characteristic of a field of

heat is the fact that it causes different effects on different materials. But we

could  very  well  imagine  that  the  coefficients  of  heat  expansion  of  all

materials might be equal—then no difference would exist between a field of

heat and the geometry of space. It would be permissible to say that in the

neighborhood of a warm body the geometry is changed just as (according to

Einstein) space is curved in the neighborhood of a large mass. Nothing could

prevent us from carrying through this conception consistently. We do not

adopt this procedure because we would then obtain a special geometry for

copper, another one for iron, etc.; we avoid these complications by means of

the definition of the rigid body.

  Although we introduced the differential effects on different materials as an

indication of physical forces, a test for forces is not necessarily bound to this

difference. A field of force can be demonstrated by the help of one material

alone, if the device is large enough to include inhomogeneities of the field.

This method, however, will always provide indirect evidence only, because

the  observed  change  could  equally  well  be  interpreted  as  a  change  of

geometry. That the change is interpreted as being due to a force can only be

based on the unequal effect of the force on different materials. This criterion

tells  us  what  should  be  interpreted  as  physical  deformation  and  what  as

geometry  of  space.  The  geometry  of  space,  too,  can  be  demonstrated

objectively since its physical effects are observable. The distinction between

universal  and  differential  forces  merely  classifies  the  phenomena  as

belonging in geometry or in physics.

A remark may be added concerning the treatment these questions receive

in the literature. The forces which we called universal are often characterized

as forces preserving coincidences; all objects are assumed to be deformed in

such a way that the spatial relations of adjacent bodies remain unchanged. In

this context belongs the assumption that overnight all things enlarge to the

same extent, or that the size of transported objects is uniformly affected by

their  position.  Helmholtz’  parable  of  the  spherical  mirror  comparing  the
                                                                12
world outside and inside the mirror is also of this kind;  if our world were tobe so distorted as to correspond to the geometrical relations of the mirror

images, we would not notice it, because all coincidences would be preserved.

It has been correctly said that such forces are not demonstrable, and it has

been correctly inferred that they have to be set equal to zero by definition if

the question concerning the structure of space is to be meaningful. It follows

from the foregoing considerations that this is a necessary but not a sufficient

condition. Forces destroying coincidences must also be set equal to zero, if

they satisfy the properties of the universal forces mentioned on p. 13; only

then  is  the  problem  of  geometry  uniquely  determined.  Our  concept  of

universal  force  is  thus  more  general  and  contains  the  concept  of  the

coincidence-preserving  force  as  a  special  case.  It  should  not  be  said,

therefore,  that  universal  forces  are  not  demonstrable;  this  holds  only  for

forces which preserve coincidences. Fig. 4, however, is an example of an

indicator showing universal forces which destroy coincidences (in this case

the coincidence QS).

We can define such forces as equal to zero because a force is no absolute

datum. When does a force exist? By force we understand something which is

responsible for a geometrical change. If a measuring rod is shorter at one

point than at another, we interpret this contraction as the effect of a force. The

existence of a force is therefore dependent on the coordinative definition of

geometry.  If  we  say:  actually  a  geometry G  applies,  but  we  measure  a

geometry G′,  we  define  at  the  same  time  a  force F  which  causes  the

difference between G and G′. The geometry G constitutes the zero point for

the magnitude of a force. If we find that there result several geometries G′

according  as  the  material  of  the  measuring  instrument  varies, F  is  a

differential force; in this case we gauge the effect of F upon the different

materials in such a way that all G′ can be reduced to a common G. If we find,

however, that there is only one G′ for all materials, F is a universal force. In

this case we can renounce the distinction between G and G′, i.e., we can

identify the zero point with G′, thus setting F equal to zero. This is the result

that our definition of the rigid body achieves.


§ 7. TECHNICAL IMPOSSIBILITY AND LOGICAL

IMPOSSIBILITY

In the following section a criticism will be discussed which has been made

against our theory of coordinative definitions. It has been objected that webase the arbitrariness in the choice of the definition on the impossibility of

making measurements. Although it is admitted that certain differences cannot

be verified by measurement, we should not infer from this fact that they do

not exist. If we had no means of discovering the shape of surface E in Fig. 2

(p.  11)  it  would  still  be  meaningful  to  ask  what  shape  the  surface  has;

although the possibility of making measurements is dependent on our human

abilities, the objective fact is independent of them. Thus we are accused of

having confused subjective inability with objective indeterminacy.

  There  are,  indeed,  many  cases  where  physics  is  unable  to  make

measurements. Does this mean that the magnitude to be measured does not

exist?  It  is  impossible,  for  instance,  to  determine  exactly  the  number  of

molecules in a cubic centimeter of air; we can say with a high degree of

certainty that we shall never succeed in counting every individual molecule.

But can we infer that this number does not exist? On the contrary, we must

say that there will always be an integer which denotes this quantity exactly.

The mistake of the theory of relativity is supposed to consist in the fact that it

confuses  the impossibility  of  making  measurements  with objective

indeterminacy.

  Whoever makes this objection overlooks an important distinction. There is

an impossibility of making measurements which is due to the limitation of

our technical means; I shall call it technical impossibility. In addition, there is

a Logical impossibility. of measuring. Even if we had a perfect experimental

technique, we should not be able to avoid this logical impossibility. It is

logically impossible to determine whether the standard meter in Paris is really

a meter. The highest refinement of our geodetic instruments does not teach us

anything about this problem, because the meter cannot be defined in absolute

terms.  This  is  the  reason  why  the  measuring  rod  in  Paris  is  called  the

definition of a meter. It is arbitrarily defined as the unit, and the question

whether  it  really  represents  this  unit  has  lost  its  meaning.  The  same

considerations hold for a comparison of units at distant places. Here we are

not dealing with technical limitations, but with a logical impossibility. The

impossibility of a determination of the shape of a surface, if universal forces

are  admitted,  is  not  due  to  a  deficiency  of  our  instruments, but  is  the

consequence of an unprecise question. The question concerning the shape of

the surface has no precise formulation, unless it is preceded by a coordinative

definition of congruence. What is to be understood by “the shape of a realsurface ” ? Whatever experiments and measurements I make, they will never

furnish a unique indication of the shape of the surface. If universal forces are

admitted,  the  measurements  may  be  interpreted  in  such  a  way  that  many

different shapes of surfaces are compatible with the same observations. There

is  one  definition  which  closes  the  logical  gap  and  tells  us  which

interpretations of our observations must be eliminated: this task is performed

by the coordinative definition. It gives a precise meaning to the question of

the shape of the real surface and makes a unique answer possible, just as a

question  about  length  has  a  unique  meaning  only  when  the  unit  of

measurement  is  given.  It  is  not  a  technical  failure  that  prevents  us  from

determining  the  shape  of  a  surface  without  a  coordinative  definition  of

congruence,  but  a  logical  impossibility  that  has  nothing  to  do  with  the

limitations of human abilities.

The situation will be further clarified if we compare the last example with

the case of the indeterminacy of the number of molecules in a given cubic

centimeter  of  air.  This  number  is  precisely  defined  and  it  is  only  due  to

human imperfection that we cannot determine it exactly. But in this case an

approximation is possible which will increase with increasing perfection of

our technical instruments. When we are faced with a logical impossibility

there are no approximations. We cannot decide approximately whether the

surface E of Fig. 2 (p. 11) is a plane, or a surface with a hemispherical hump

in  the  middle;  there  is  no  defined  limit  which  the  measurement  could

approach.  Furthermore,  once  the  coordinative  definition  is  given,  the

technical impossibility of an exact measurement remains. Even our definition

of the rigid body does not permit a strict determination of the structure of

space; all our measurements will still contain some degree of inexactness

which a progressive technique will gradually reduce but never overcome.


§ 8. THE RELATIVITY OF GEOMETRY

  With regard to the problem of geometry we have come to realize that the

question  which  geometry  holds  for  physical  space  must  be  decided  by

measurements, i.e., empirically. Furthermore, this decision is dependent on

the assumption of an arbitrary coordinative definition of the comparison of

length.  Against  this  conception  arguments  have  been  set  forth  which

endeavor  to  retain  Euclidean  geometry  for  physical  space  under  any

circumstances and thus give it a preference among all other geometries. Onthe basis of our results we can discuss these arguments; our analysis will lead

to the relativity of geometry.

One of the arguments maintains it is a mistake to believe that the choice of

the  coordinative  definition  is  a  matter  left  to  our  discretion.  The

measurements of geometry as carried through in practice presuppose quite

complicated measuring instruments such as the theodolite ; therefore these

measurements  cannot  be  evaluated  without  a  theory  of  the  measuring

instruments. The theory of the measuring instruments, however, presupposes

the validity of Euclidean geometry and it constitutes a contradiction to infer a

non-Euclidean geometry from the results.

This objection can be met in the following way. Our conception permits us

to  start  with  the  assumption  that  Euclidean  geometry  holds  for  physical

space.  Under  certain  conditions,  however,  we  obtain  the  result  that  there

exists a universal force F that deforms all measuring instruments in the same

way. However, we can invert the interpretation : we can set F equal to zero

by definition and correct in turn the theory of our measuring instruments. We

are  able  to  proceed  in  this  manner  because  a  transformation  of  all

measurements from one geometry into another is possible and involves no

difficulties. It is correct to say that all measurements must be preceded by a

definition; we expressed this fact by the indispensability of the coordinative

definition.  The  mistake  of  the  objection  consists  in  the  belief  that  this

definition  cannot  be  changed  afterwards.  Just  as  we  can  measure  the

temperature with a Fahrenheit thermometer and then convert the results into

Celsius,  measurements  can  be  started  under  the  assumption  of  Euclidean

geometry and later converted into non-Euclidean measurements. There is no

logical objection to this procedure.

In practice the method is much simpler. It turns out that the non-Euclidean

geometry  obtained  under  our  coordinative  definition  of  the  rigid  body

deviates quantitatively only very little from Euclidean geometry when small

areas are concerned. In this connection “small area” means “on the order of

the size of the earth”; deviations from Euclidean geometry can be noticed

only in astronomic dimensions. In practice, therefore, it is not necessary to

correct the theory of the measuring instruments afterwards, because these

corrections  lie  within  the  errors  of  observation.  The  following  method  of

inference  is  permissible:  we  can  prove  by  the  assumption  that  Euclidean

geometry  holds  for  small  areas  that  in  astronomic  dimensions  a  non-Euclidean  geometry  holds  which  merges  infinitesimally  into  Euclidean

geometry. No logical objection can be advanced against this method, which is

characteristic of the train of thought in modern physics. It is carried through

in  practice  for  astronomic  measurements  designed  to  confirm  Einstein’s

theory of gravitation.

The objection is connected with the a priori theory of space that goes back

to Kant and today is represented in various forms. Not only Kantians and

Neo-Kantians  attempt  to  maintain  the a priori character of geometry:  the

tendency is also pronounced in philosophical schools which in other respects

are not Kantian. It is not my intention to give a critical analysis of Kant’s

philosophy in the present book. In the course of the discussion of the theory

of relativity, it has become evident that the philosophy of Kant has been

subject to so many interpretations by his disciples that it can no longer serve

as a sharply defined basis for present day epistemological analysis. Such an

analysis would clarify less the epistemological question of the structure of

space  than  the historical  question  of  the  meaning  and  content  of  Kant’s

system. The author has presented his own views on this problem in another
            13
publication;  the present investigation is aimed at philosophical clarification

and will not concern itself with historical questions. Therefore, I shall select

only those arguments of Kant’s theory of space, the refutation of which will

further  our  understanding  of  the  problem.  Although  in  my  opinion  the

essential  part  of  Kant’s  theory  will  thereby  be  covered,  I  do  not  claim  a

historically complete evaluation of it in this book.

The ideas expressed in the preceding considerations attempted to establish

Euclidean geometry as epistemologically a priori; we found that this a priori

cannot be maintained and that Euclidean geometry is not an indispensable

presupposition of knowledge. We turn now to the idea of the visual a priori;

this Kantian doctrine bases the preference for Euclidean geometry upon the

existence of a certain manner in which we visualize space.

The theory contends that an innate property of the human mind, the ability

of visualization, demands that we adhere to Euclidean geometry. In the same

way as a certain self-evidence compels us to believe the laws of arithmetic, a

visual  self-evidence  compels  us  to  believe  in  the  validity  of  Euclidean

geometry. It can be shown that this self-evidence is not based on logical

grounds. Since mathematics furnishes a proof that the construction of non-

Euclidean geometries does not lead to contradictions, no logical self-evidencecan  be  claimed  for  Euclidean  geometry.  This  is  the  reason  why  the  self-

evidence  of  Euclidean  geometry  has  sometimes  been  derived,  in  Kantian

fashion, from the human ability of visualization conceived as a source of

knowledge.

  Everybody  has  a  more  or  less  clear  notion  of  what  is  understood  by

visualization. If we draw two points on a piece of paper, connect them by a

straight line and add a curved connecting line, we “see” that the straight line

is shorter than the curved line. We even claim to be certain that the straight

line is shorter than any other line connecting the two points. We say this

without being able to prove it by measurements, because it is impossible for

us to draw and measure all the lines. The power of imagination compelling us

to  make  this  assertion  is  called  the  ability  of visualization.  Similarly,  the

Euclidean axiom of the parallels seems to be visually necessary. It remains

for us to investigate this human quality and its significance for the problem of

space.

The analysis will be carried through in two steps. Let us first assume it is

correct to say that a special ability of visualization exists, and that Euclidean

geometry is distinguished from all other geometries by the fact that it can

easily  be  visualized.  The  question  arises:  what  consequences  does  this

assumption  have  for  physical  space?  Only  after  this  question  has  been

answered can the assumption itself be tested. The second step of our analysis

will therefore consist in the inquiry whether a special ability of visualization

exists (§ 9-§ 11).

Let us turn to the first question, which has to be reformulated in order to

relate it clearly to the epistemological problem.

  Mathematics proves that every geometry of the Riemannian kind can be

mapped upon another one of the same kind. In the language of physics this

means the following:

  Theorem θ: “Given a geometry G′  to  which  the  measuring  instruments

conform, we can imagine a universal force F which affects the instruments in

such a way that the actual geometry is an arbitrary geometry G, while the

observed deviation from G is due to a universal deformation of the measuring
              14
instruments.”

No  epistemological  objection  can  be  made  against  the  correctness  of

theorem θ. Is the visual a priori compatible with it?  Offhand we must say yes. Since the Euclidean geometry Go belongs to the

geometries  of  the  Riemannian  kind,  it  follows  from  theorem θ  that  it  is

always possible to carry through the visually preferred geometry for physical

space. Thus we have proved that we can always satisfy the requirement of

visualization.

But something more is proved by theorem θ which does not fit very well

into the theory of the visual a priori. The theorem asserts that Euclidean

geometry is not preferable on epistemological grounds. Theorem θ shows all

geometries to be equivalent; it formulates the principle of the relativity of

geometry. It follows that it is meaningless to speak about one geometry as the

true  geometry.  We  obtain  a  statement  about  physical  reality  only  if  in

addition  to  the  geometry G  of  the  space  its  universal  field  of  force F  is

specified. Only the combination




                                                                  G+F




is a testable statement.

We  can  now  understand  the  significance  of  a  decision  for  Euclidean

geometry  on  the  basis  of  a  visual a priori.  The  decision  means  only  the

choice of a specific coordinative definition. In our definition of the rigid body

we  set F  =  0;  the  statement  about  the  resulting G  is  then  a  univocal

description of reality. This definition means that in “G+F” the second factor

is zero. The visual a priori, however, sets G = Go. But then the empirical

component in the results of measurements is represented by the determination

of F; only through the combination




                                                                  G+F
                                                                  o




are the properties of space exhaustively described.  There is nothing wrong with a coordinative definition established on the

requirement  that  a  certain  kind  of  geometry  is  to  result  from  the

measurements. We ourselves renounced the simplest form of the coordinative

definition, which consists in pointing to a measuring rod; instead we chose a

much more complicated coordinative definition in terms of our distinction

between universal and differential forces. A coordinative definition can also

be introduced by the prescription what the result of the measurements is to

be.  “The  comparison  of  length  is  to  be  performed  in  such  a  way  that

Euclidean geometry will be the result”—this stipulation is a possible form of

a coordinative definition. It may be compared to the definition of the meter in

terms of the circumference of the earth: “The unit is to be chosen in such a

way that 40 million times this length will be equal to the circumference of the

earth.”

  Although it may be admitted that Euclidean geometry is unique in that it

can be easily visualized, the theory of the visual a priori does not disprove

the theory of the relativity of geometry and of the necessity for coordinative

definitions of the comparison of length. On the contrary, it is only this theory

that  can  state  precisely  the  epistemological  function  of  visualization:  the

possibility  of  visualization  is  a  ground  for  subjective  preference  of  one

particular coordinative definition. But the occurrence of visualization does

not imply anything about the space of real objects.

In  this  connection  another  argument  in  support  of  the  preference  for

Euclidean geometry is frequently adduced. To be sure, this argument is not

related to the problem of visualization, but like the visual a priori it attributes

a specific epistemological position to Euclidean geometry; therefore we shall

consider  it  here.  It  is  maintained  that  Euclidean  geometry  is  the simplest

geometry, and hence physics must choose the coordinative definition G = Go

rather  than  the  coordinative  definition F =  0.  This  point  of  view  can  be

answered  as  follows:  physics  is  not  concerned  with  the  question  which

geometry is simpler, but with the question which coordinative definition is

simpler. It seems that the coordinative definition F = 0 is simpler, because

then the expression G+F reduces to G. But even this result is not essential,

since in this case simplicity is not a criterion for truth. Simplicity certainly

plays an important part in physics, even as a criterion for choosing between

physical hypotheses. The significance of simplicity as a means to knowledge

will  have  to  be  carefully  examined  in  connection  with  the  problem  ofinduction, which does not fall within the scope of this book.

  Geometry  is  concerned  solely  with  the  simplicity  of  a definition,  and

therefore the problem of empirical significance does not arise. It is a mistake

to say that Euclidean geometry is “more true” than Einstein’s geometry or

vice  versa,  because  it  leads  to  simpler  metrical  relations.  We  said  that

Einstein’s geometry leads to simpler relations because in it F = 0. But we can

no more say that Einstein’s geometry is “truer” than Euclidean geometry,

than we can say that the meter is a “truer” unit of length than the yard. The

simpler system is always preferable; the advantage of meters and centimeters

over yards and feet is only a matter of economy and has no bearing upon

reality. Properties of reality are discovered only by a combination of the

results of measurement with the underlying coordinative definition. Thus it is

a characterization of objective reality that (according to Einstein) a three-

dimensional non-Euclidean geometry results in the neighborhood of heavenly

bodies, if we define the comparison of length by transported rigid rods. But

only the combination of the two statements has objective significance. The

same  state  of  affairs  can  therefore  be  described  in  different  ways.  In  our

example it could just as well be said that in the neighborhood of a heavenly

body a universal field of force exists which affects all measuring rods, while

the geometry is Euclidean. Both combinations of statements are equally true,

as  can  be  seen  from  the  fact  that  one  can  be  transformed  into  the  other.

Similarly, it is just as true to say that the circumference of the earth is 40

million meters as to say that it is 40 thousand kilometers. The significance of

this simplicity should not be exaggerated; this kind of simplicity, which we

call descriptive simplicity, has nothing to do with truth.

Taken  alone,  the  statement  that  a  certain  geometry  holds  for  space  is

therefore meaningless. It acquires meaning only if we add the coordinative

definition used in the comparison of widely separated lengths. The same rule

holds  for  the  geometrical  shape  of  bodies.  The  sentence  “The  earth  is  a

sphere” is an incomplete statement, and resembles the statement “This room

is seven units long.” Both statements say something about objective states of

affairs  only  if  the  assumed  coordinative  definitions  are  added,  and  both

statements must be changed if other coordinative definitions are used. These

considerations indicate what is meant by relativity of geometry.

This conception of the problem of geometry is essentially the result of the

work of Riemann, Helmholtz, and Poincaré and is known as conventionalism.While Riemann prepared the way for an application of geometry to physical

reality by his mathematical formulation of the concept of space, Helmholtz

laid the philosophical foundations. In particular, he recognized the connection

of the problem of geometry with that of rigid bodies and interpreted correctly

the possibility of a visual representation of non-Euclidean spaces (cf. p. 63).

It is his merit, furthermore, to have clearly stated that Kant’s theory of space
                                                                          15
is  untenable  in  view  of  recent  mathematical  developments.  Helmholtz’

epistemological lectures must therefore be regarded as the source of modern
                                          16
philosophical  knowledge  of  space.  It  is  Einstein’s  achievement  to  have

applied the theory of the relativity of geometry to physics. The surprising

result  was  the  fact  that  the  world  is  non-Euclidean,  as  the  theorists  of

relativity are wont to say; in our language this means: if F = 0, the geometry

G  becomes  non-Euclidean.  This  outcome  had  not  been  anticipated,  and

Helmholtz and Poincaré still believed that the geometry obtained could not be

proved to be different from Euclidean geometry. Only Einstein’s theory of

gravitation  predicted  the  non-Euclidean  result  which  was  confirmed  by

astronomical  observations.  The  deviations  from  Euclidean  geometry,

however, are very small and not observable in everyday life.

  Unfortunately, the philosophical discussion of conventionalism, misled by

its ill-fitting name, did not always present the epistemological aspect of the
                                    17
problem with sufficient clarity. From conventionalism the consequence was

derived  that  it  is  impossible  to  make  an  objective  statement  about  the

geometry  of  physical  space,  and  that  we  are  dealing  with  subjective

arbitrariness  only;  the  concept  of  geometry  of  real  space  was  called

meaningless. This is a misunderstanding. Although the statement about the

geometry is based upon certain arbitrary definitions, the statement itself does

not  become  arbitrary:  once  the  definitions  have  been  formulated,  it  is

determined through objective reality alone which is the actual geometry. Let

us use our previous example: although we can define the scale of temperature

arbitrarily, the indication of the temperature of a physical object does not

become a subjective matter. By selecting a certain scale we can stipulate a

certain arbitrary number of degrees of heat for the respective body, but this

indication has an objective meaning as soon as the coordinative definition of

the  scale  is  added.  On  the  contrary,  it  is  the  significance  of  coordinative

definitions to lend an objective meaning to physical measurements. As long

as  it  was  not  noticed  at  what  points  of  the  metrical  system  arbitrarydefinitions  occur,  all  measuring  results  were  undetermined;  only  by

discovering the points of arbitrariness, by identifying them as such and by

classifying them as definitions can we obtain objective measuring results in

physics. The objective character of the physical statement is thus shifted to a

statement about relations. A statement about the boiling point of water is no

longer regarded as an absolute statement, but as a statement about a relation

between the boiling water and the length of the column of mercury. There

exists a similar objective statement about the geometry of real space: it is a

statement  about  a  relation  between  the  universe  and  rigid  rods.  The

geometry  chosen  to  characterize  this  relation  is  only  a  mode  of  speech;

however, our awareness of the relativity of geometry enables us to formulate

the objective character of a statement about the geometry of the physical

world as a statement about relations. In this sense we are permitted to speak

of physical geometry. The description of nature is not stripped of arbitrariness

by naive absolutism, but only by recognition and formulation of the points of

arbitrariness. The only path to objective knowledge leads through conscious

awareness of the role that subjectivity plays in our methods of research.


§ 9. THE VISUALIZATION OF EUCLIDEAN GEOMETRY

  With the result of the foregoing section in mind we turn now to the second

question essential to the theory of the visual a priori of Euclidean geometry:

Is  it  true  that  Euclidean  geometry  is  the  only  geometry  which  can  be

visualized? If Euclidean geometry is distinguished by being easily visualized,

this fact does not add anything to our knowledge of physical space. But does

Euclidean geometry have this distinction? Let us analyze this question.

The investigation will have to proceed in two directions. On the one hand,

we must inquire whether other geometries can be visualized; this question is

usually taken to be the main one. On the other hand —and this question will

be  the  subject  matter  of  the  present  section—we  must  find  out  what

visualization of Euclidean geometry means, and to what extent Euclidean

geometry can be visualized. The visualization of Euclidean geometry should

by no means be taken for granted; on the contrary, we shall carefully examine

this assertion that has so frequently been maintained by philosophers.

At the very start of our investigation we encounter a difficulty. As soon as

we try to give a more precise formulation to the experience of visualization,

we  are  in  the  midst  of  psychological  experiments:  we  try  to  analyzegeometrical images. As a consequence we have those philosophers against us

who maintain that the problem of visualization concerns not psychological

but philosophical issues. In particular, this conception is represented by Neo-

Kantians  who  assert  that  Kant’s  pure  intuition  is  not  a  psychological

phenomenon. These objections must not deter us. It has always turned out

that  such  “border  skirmishes”  do  not  help  in  the  study  of  the  problems;

sometimes it is much harder to make a decision about the classification of a

problem than about its solution. We shall therefore disregard the objections

and try to find the right method of analyzing the experience of geometrical

visualization.

Two characteristic features stand out: it is of the nature of visualization that

it reproduces the particular object in the form of an image. When we attempt

to visualize an object, for instance a triangle, blurred images emerge in our

mind  that  are  obviously  connected  with  previous  perceptions.  We  may

imagine a white triangle on a blackboard, or a triangle drawn by pencil on a

white sheet of paper; but the image always appears somewhat schematic.

Individual details occur only when we concentrate on vivid reproductions of

perceived  triangles;  we  suddenly  see  that  the  lines  of  chalk  marking  the

triangle  have  a  certain  width  and  that  they  are  composed  of  individual

particles of chalk. The schematic triangle, however, is also determined by

previous  perceptions.  It  is  not  flaming  red  on  a  blue  background—such

triangles are rarely seen; the schematic triangle resembles a triangle drawn by

chalk or pencil much more closely than such a product of the imagination. It

is  of  medium  shape  and  not  a  degenerate  triangle  with  rarely-perceived

unusual  relations  between  the  sides.  In  this  connection  a  peculiar

indeterminateness can be observed: it is difficult for us to estimate the size of

the  angle  at  the  top.  If  we  want  a  more  precise  statement,  we  must

concentrate much harder; only then can we reproduce the triangle vividly

enough in our imagination to estimate the size of the angle. It is unnecessary

to analyze these phenomena more closely, since they vary greatly with the

individual person. Let us call the function of visualization described above its

image producing function.

  Apart from the image-producing function—and this constitutes the second

characteristic  feature  of  visualization—it  has  a normative  function.

Visualization is not completely arbitrary. We use visualization in order to

discover  geometrical  relations.  I  have  a  triangle  and  a  straight  lineintersecting one of the sides of the triangle; if sufficiently prolonged, will the

straight line also intersect another side of the triangle? Visualization says

“yes.” It simply demands this answer and I can do nothing about it. I try to

turn the straight line in my imagination; I see that the line can be managed to

intersect one or the other side of the triangle, but I am unable to prevent it

from intersecting either side. It is simply impossible. This normative function

is the philosophically more important component of visualization; it is the

cause  of  the  philosophical  controversies  about  the  epistemological

significance  of  visualization.  Kant’s synthetic  a  priori  of  pure  intuition

springs from the normative function of visualization. It is this function that

tends to single out Euclidean geometry from all the others; it seems to compel

us to regard Euclid’s axiom of the parallels as unquestionably true.

  What is the source of the normative function and the compulsion which it

expresses? It seems that the source is the image-producing function, because

the image-producing function is a necessary condition of the effectiveness of

the  normative  function.  Only  after  we  imagine  the  triangle  and  the

intersecting line do we “see” that the law mentioned above holds. There are

cases where we contemplate a problem for some time without being able to

solve  it,  until  we  succeed  in  producing  a  clear  image;  we  then  read  the

desired law from the image. How many diagonals can be drawn from one

corner of a pentagon? We are not able to answer this question immediately; at

first we make some vain efforts and hope to find the answer so to speak

offhand without the use of the image-producing function. We do not succeed.

We must first mobilize our will; suddenly the pentagon is visualized with its

characteristic asymmetry, one corner at the top, one side at the bottom. Now

we draw two diagonals from the bottom left corner to the two corners at

right; more are evidently impossible. This vivid image lends certainty to our

answer.

The vividness of the picture and the certainty of the judgment are enhanced

if we actually draw the pentagon. We see the result immediately, and it is no

longer necessary to strain our will. But obviously this facilitation is the only

function of the drawing. The perception of the drawing does not play the role

of an empirical discovery; the situation is not comparable to the performing

of an experiment as a consequence of which we expect perception to supply

an  answer.  If  we  combine  two  unknown  salt  solutions,  we  expect  the

perception to tell us whether or not a precipitate is the result. The drawing,however, has a different function. We do not read results from it, but read

them into it. We also reserve the privilege of correcting the drawing, because

drawings are not always reliable. Suppose we draw a pentagon with all of its

diagonals and try to count them. If we draw a pentagon very carefully we

shall succeed. But it may easily happen that one corner is drawn too flat, and

thus is overlooked when we draw some of the diagonals; in this case we must

correct the drawing. Apparently we do not trust our perception but follow an

inner compulsion; the perception of the drawing serves only to facilitate the

image-producing function. The detour by way of the drawing makes the final

statement more certain.

  These considerations suggest that the normative function does not have its

origin in the image-producing function. We correct not only the drawing but

also the images themselves by means of the normative function. Sometimes

the  image-producing  function  provides  us  with  a  false  image.  I  put  the

problem  of  the  pentagon  mentioned  above  to  a  person  untrained  in

mathematics. I immediately got the rash answer “five.” He was evidently in

the phase of speaking offhand. Then followed a “no, one moment.” Now the

image-producing function was employed, and after some reflection came the

answer “three.” Here the image-producing function had evidently furnished

the  wrong  result.  A  “no”  followed  and  after  some  moments  the  correct

answer  “two.”  The  normative  function  had  intervened  and  corrected  the

images. It is not the case that we simply wait for images that will dictate the

result to us. On the contrary, the images are subject to a directive, and if they

do not correspond to it, they will not be accepted.

This  directive  is  stronger  than  is  usually  suspected,  and  it  works  even

behind the scenes. It not only refers to conditions indicated in the problem

but also adds some tacit conditions. We considered the theorem that a straight

line intersecting one side of a triangle must also intersect another side of the

triangle. Is this true? By no means; I can imagine a straight line descending in

space  and  not  situated  in  the  same  plane  as  the  triangle;  in  this  case  it

intersects one side only. This answer is certainly trivial—but often we do not

notice how much we restrict a problem by tacit assumptions. Some parlor

games make use of this unawareness. Three matches are laid on the table in

the shape of a triangle; the problem is to form four triangles by adding three

more matches. Rarely somebody conceives the idea of arranging the three

matches spatially on top of the triangle lying on the table so that a tetrahedronresults. And in this category belongs the story of the egg of Columbus: note

what  conditions  you  impose  upon  your  imagination;  then  many  an

“impossible” turns out to be an “impossible under such and such conditions.”

The humorous aspect of the examples just mentioned is due to the fact that

it  would  be  quite  easy  to  eliminate  the  tacit  assumptions;  the  questions,

however, are asked in such a way that they suggest them. Since the matches

are put on the table it is suggested that the puzzle concerns a problem of the

plane.  Apart  from  the  particular  aspect  of  this  problem,  such  experiences

furnish  the  key  for  quite  a  few  difficulties  of  geometrical  visualization.

Rather late in the history of mathematics the analysis situs was discovered,

which led to certain peculiarities of visualization. Does there exist a surface

having  only  one  side?  Visualization  suggests  a  prompt  “no.”  But  every

student of a lecture on topology has taken a strip of paper, and twisted once

around  itself,  pasted  it  together  in  form  of  a  ring;  this  paper  surface  has

indeed  only  one  side.  After  we  have  seen  such  a  model,  our  ability  to

visualize has increased. Or again: a closed curve is drawn on a surface; is it

possible to draw on the surface a line of any shape that connects a point of

the  surface  situated  on  one  side  of  the  curve  with  a  point  of  the  surface

situated  on  the  other  side  of  the  curve,  without  intersecting  the  curve?

Visualization  again  answers  “no,”  but  only  because  the  image-producing

function shows a plane. Therefore, we attempt to solve the problem in the

plane, where it is impossible. Mathematics has shown that there are surfaces

of  different  topological  properties  where  not  all  closed  curves  divide  the

surface into separate areas. We can very well imagine such surfaces; or more

precisely: we can direct the image-producing function of visualization so that

it will furnish elements for which the desired property holds. If occasionally

we are answered “impossible” by the images of our visualization, we must

first inquire to what extent tacit assumptions are contained in the elements

furnished  by  the  image-producing  function;  the  presence  of  these

assumptions may prevent us from producing an image of the problem under

consideration. Only if these assumptions are explicitly stated in the problem

is it correctly answered. In the example of the straight line intersecting the

side of a triangle, it must be stated explicitly that the straight line must lie in

the plane of the triangle. Only then is the problem worded correctly. In this

instance it seems to be easy to add the missing assumption later, but it is not

always  so  easy.  We  do  not  know,  either,  whether  we  tacitly  add  other

assumptions in the theorem of the triangle given above.In this very example some further conditions play a part. The theorem is

correct only if it refers to Euclidean straight lines and to a Euclidean plane. It

does not hold for every kind of surface and its straightest lines; the theorem

has exceptions on the torus, for instance, (Fig. 1, Plate I). It is not a matter of

escaping into the third dimension as above; all lines remain within the same

two-dimensional  surface.  In  order  to  formulate  the  theorem  strictly,  the

condition must be added that by “straight line” and “plane” the respective

phenomena of Euclidean geometry are understood. Only then is it conclusive.

But then there is nothing spectacular about the visual complusion inherent

in  the  theorem,  because  the  visual  compulsion  does  not  furnish  anything

different from the logical compulsion inherent in Euclidean geometry. In the

system of Euclidean geometry this theorem is necessary and we discover this
                                                                                          18
fact by logical analysis of the geometry whose axioms include this theorem.

Without this theorem the elements of geometry, such as the straight line and

the plane, have very different properties. The merit of visualization consists

only  in  the  fact  that  it  translates  the  logical  compulsion  of  Euclidean

geometry into a visual compulsion. The normative function of visualization is

revealed  as  a  correlate  of  the  logical  compulsion  and  achieves  the  same

results by means of the elements furnished by the image-producing function

as the logical inference does by means of the conceptual elements of thought.

This is the significance of visualization. It seems to be much easier to make

logical inferences with the help of visual representation than by means of

abstract concepts. Proofs which the mathematician has found only with great

effort—as for instance the theorem that a continuous function assumes every

intermediate  value  between  any  two  of  its  values—became  immediately

obvious  through  visualization.  In  this  gift  of  visual  inference  our  mind

possesses one of the most powerful tools, not only for science but also for

everyday  life.  It  is  certainly  wonderful  that  such  an  achievement  of

visualization is possible; but it is not an achievement outside the frame of

logic. The manner in which logical inferences are actually made is strange

and obscure and rarely resembles the formal method of logic. But this fact is

irrelevant for the problem of the visualization of geometry. We may therefore

take it for granted (not subject to an investigation in this connection) that

visual processes play a role in logical thinking.

The examples from two-dimensional geometry which we selected are very

instructive for our problem. If we speak of a special visual compulsion, weexpress the idea that more restrictive laws hold for visualization than for

logical thinking. It is this idea which Kant meant by his synthetic a priori

judgments  of  visualization,  and  it  is  also  the  reaction  which  aprioristic

philosophy had all along to the existence of non-Euclidean geometries: it is

possible to construct them logically, but it is impossible to visualize them.

According to this conception, visualization admits a narrower selection of

geometrical structures than does logic. It turns out that this statement is not

true in the two-dimensional domain. The normative function of visualization

does  not  demand  more  than  logic;  what  is  logically  consistent  can  be

visualized  as  far  as  it  does  not  surpass  the  precision  attainable  by  visual

representation—for the two-dimensional realm this is certainly true. It is not

different in the three-dimensional domain. The images which we habitually

use  are  those  of  Euclidean  geometry.  No  wonder  that  we  derive  only

Euclidean laws from them. It never happens in the game of chess that the two

original bishops belonging to one player stand on squares of the same color.

It is, however, possible simply to put them upon two white squares. The

statement about the bishops is correct only so long as the rules of the game

are adhered to; the law of the oblique path of the bishop logically implies the

necessity that the color will remain unchanged. The images by which we

visualize geometry are always so adjusted as to correspond to the laws which

we read from them; these laws are always implied. The statement that we

cannot visualize non-Euclidean geometry must therefore be reformulated: We

cannot visualize non-Euclidean geometry by means of Euclidean elements of

visualization.  In  this  form  the  result  is  trivial;  what  it  denies  is  a  logical

impossibility. The question must be asked differently: Can we change the

image-producing elements in such a way that we can read the laws of non-

Euclidean geometry from the new images? Only in such a manner can we

attempt  a  visualization  of  non-Euclidean  geometry.  The  question  will  be

treated in § 11. We shall have to analyze, in particular, at what point tacit

assumptions  are  smuggled  into  the  images,  assumptions  that  make  them

Euclidean and cause the normative function to reject non-Euclidean laws.


§ 10. THE LIMITS OF VISUALIZATION

Before  taking  up  the  problem  of  the  visualization  of  non-Euclidean

geometry  we  must  consider  another  fact  the  significance  of  which  is

controversial.  It  was  explained  above  that  the  image-producing  function,

under the directive of the normative function, furnishes images from whichlogical  laws  can  be  read  by  means  of  visualization.  It  must  be  noticed,

however,  that  there  exist  limitations  for  visualization  that  prevent  the

production of images from going beyond certain simple relations. We are

able  to  visualize  a  pentagon  but  do  not  succeed  with  a  decagon  without

drawing it on a piece of paper. A polygon of a thousand sides, even if we see

it  drawn  on  a  piece  of  paper,  has  lost  the  specific  image-character  that

distinguishes it from a polygon with one thousand-and-four sides. These are

the limitations that compel the mathematician to renounce visual methods in

favor  of  analytical  ones.  Nobody  will  attempt  to  count  by  means  of

visualization the number of diagonals in a polygon with a thousand sides; we

would not even trust the result of counting them in a drawing, but would

always prefer the analytical method, which derives the number of diagonals

from  the  number  of  corners  by  a  simple  formula.  There  are  individual

differences in the ability of visualizing geometry, but they are restricted to a

certain domain; beyond this domain there begins for everybody the larger

realm of geometrical figures which can no longer be visualized. It would be a

mistake to say that the entire Euclidean geometry can be visualized. Only the

elementary geometrical figures can be visualized, that is, realized through

images.

  Even these elementary geometrical structures can be visualized only within

certain limitations depending on the size of the figures. We frequently say

that we can visualize the terrestial globe; but this seems to be a mistake. We

can  visualize  a  sphere,  but  not  of  the  dimensions  of  the  earth.  What  we

visualize, when we speak of the possibility of visualizing the earth, is a small

sphere which we believe to be similar to the terrestrial globe. We can try to

enlarge the image of this sphere; we may perhaps visualize it as big as a

balloon or as a mountain—but very soon we must admit failure. It may be

objected that there do not exist absolute sizes in our images—but that is not

true. A sphere of the size of a balloon has a visual quality different from that

of a sphere the size of a tennis-ball, and such a sphere has again a quality

different from that of the spherical head of a pin. In our imagination such

structures can be distinguished just as well as a triangle and a square. The fact

that in actual perception size is a matter of perspective has nothing to do with

this ability. If it happens occasionally that we see a distant balloon as small as

a tennis-ball because it is seen in the same angular perspective as such a ball,

it means only that we transfer the visual quality “tennis ball” to the physical

structure “balloon.” It would be a mistake to say that this transfer is irrelevantto visualization, because the relations in the large dimensions resemble those

in the small dimensions. If small images are used to visualize large figures, it

is an indirect method that makes use of extraneous pictures. This detour is

possible because of a special property of Euclidean geometry. The system of

Euclidean geometry has theorems of similarity. In non-Euclidean geometry

there are no such theorems; the angular sum of the triangle, and the relation

between  circumference  and  diameter  of  a  circle  depend  there  upon  the

absolute size of the figure. In non-Euclidean geometry, therefore, the indirect

method must be modified; the smaller figures must be imagined as distorted.

Such analogies are possible only within certain limitations implied by the

problem; it is dangerous to look for visual necessities where there are none.

Visualization does not necessarily presuppose that large figures can visually

be replaced by small figures of the same shape. This is a visual requirement

in Euclidean geometry only, and even in this case the transition to smaller

figures does not have the same effect as is achieved by direct perception. The

image-producing function is replaced by a conceptual coordinative method

smuggling in extraneous pictures.

The same is true for very small structures. Figures of atomic size such as

the orbit of an electron can no longer be directly visualized. Here, too, the

indirect way of visualizing similar figures in the intermediate dimension is

employed.

The limits of exactness of visual images in the intermediate domain is

connected with the impossibility of visualizing very small figures. Although

we can visualize a right angle, we cannot distinguish it from an angle of 89°

59’. If we are dealing with a triangle having such an angle, there is no other

way but to visualize an angle deviating much more from 90°; only then can

we notice the difference from the right angle. Two straight-line segments

which, if continued, intersect on the sun, are indistinguishable from parallels

on  the  earth.  We  possess,  therefore,  only  one  visual  image  for  both

phenomena.  Those  who  object  to  this  statement  forget  that  the  two  non-

parallel  segments  which  they  visualize  converge  too  quickly;  again  an

indirect method has been used by the substitution of an extraneous picture

that satisfies the specified conditions.

  Finally, the problem of the infinity of space must be mentioned among the

limitations of visualization. That this question has been disputed so much and

that even antinomies have been constructed in connection with it is due onlyto the fact that here the image-producing function of visualization fails. We

cannot visualize Euclidean space as a whole—this is briefly the meaning of

all  arguments  for  or  against  the  infinity  of  space.  For  conceptual

constructions it is very easy to handle the concept of the infinity of space, and

in  spite  of  Kant  only  that  proof  is  correct  which  infers  the  infinity  of

Euclidean space. We are able to make theoretical statements about space as a

whole,  such  as  the  statement  that  space  is  three-dimensional.  But  it  is

impossible to visualize it as a whole—to take it in at one glance just as we

take in a sphere or a landscape. Attempts to replace direct visualization by

letting  the  eyes  glide  over  homogeneous  domains  of  space  are  always

makeshift. The infinity of space contains a property of Euclidean geometry

that cannot be realized by visualization. We shall come back to this question

when dealing with the holistic properties of non-Euclidean spaces, where we

shall find analogous phenomena.

The  limits  of  visualization  described  above  certainly  exist,  and  it  is  a

mistake  often  made  in  philosophical  quarters  to  neglect  them  as  “purely

psychological.”  The  psychological  realization  is  important;  a  logical

inference  can  be  realized  psychologically  in  all  its  strictness,  but  the

visualization  of  a  right  angle  or  of  infinite  space  is  impossible.  We  are

justified,  therefore,  in  inferring  from  these  psychological  limitations  of

visualization that it is not the visualization which is responsible for the rigor

of our work, but the logic which we always think into our images. Badly

drawn figures, where homologous sides of congruent triangles are evidently

different in length, nevertheless enable us to give a strict geometrical proof;

in the same way, inexact visual images will permit strict logical inferences,

because the logical conditions of congruence are fulfilled. The inferences are

possible because the compelling factor is not the visualization but the logical

laws  implicit  in  the  images.  An  analysis  of  visualization  of  Euclidean

geometry must therefore stress the limits of this human ability: the limits

prove  that  the  normative  character  of  our  images  does  not  spring  from

visualization but from logic.

It  is  but  another  mistake  when  mathematicians  attempt  to  base  a

visualization  of  non-Euclidean  geometry  on  just  these  limits  of
              19
visualization.  The  deviations  of  physical  geometry  from  Euclidean

geometry are so small according to the theory of relativity that they are far

below the limit of exactness of visualization, and it would be convenient tosay that Einsteinian space can be visualized just as well as Euclidean space,

since no difference is noticed within the visual field. Yet this argument begs

the question. It is not permissible to base a statement about visualization upon

phenomena  where  visualization  fails;  there  are  certainly  noticeable

differences of visualization like the difference between an angle of 90° and

one  of  45°.  The  problem  of  the  ability  to  visual  non-Euclidean  geometry

centers around the question not whether the negative but whether the positive

properties of visualization can be exploited for non-Euclidean geometry. If it

is possible to visualize non-Euclidean geometry, it must be possible for a

space of strong curvature, perceptible, say within the dimensions of a room,

just as well as for Einstein’s weakly curved space—otherwise it would not

make sense to speak of visualization, and one could only say that we are

unable to visualize differences between the two spaces. It is, therefore, not

expedient to take the limits of visualization as the point of departure for our

attempt  to  make  non-Euclidean  geometry  accessible  to  visualization.  Our

only concern with these limits has been to establish the fact that it is not

visualization, but logic, which dictates the laws read from the images.

In an earlier section (§ 1) non-Euclidean geometry was made plausible by

means of “badly-drawn” figures; now we understand the deeper significance

of  this  device.  It  is  the  predominance  of  logic  in  visualization  which  is

expressed in this method. It will be our task to extend the method in such a

way that we can imagine for non-Euclidean geometry even the possibility of

“well-drawn” figures. By means of conceptual thinking, we can pass from

visualization to readjusted visualization. The human mind has the ability to

circumvent visual images by the use of abstract concepts, as it were. After

this achievement it is able to produce new images. We must not demand that

the new images have the same degree of immediacy as the old ones, and that

they come into focus with as little effort as the images we are accustomed to.

Some constraint and some adjustment of the imagination is indispensable;

and so is careful analysis which reveals what is actually visual in so-called

visual experience.


§ 11. VISUALIZATION OF NON-EUCLIDEAN GEOMETRY

It has occasionally been maintained by mathematicians who have worked a

great deal in non-Euclidean geometry that they can gradually visualize it. The

proponents of the theory of relativity argue that the visualization of Euclideangeometry is only the result of habit, and that we could gradually acquire the

ability to visualize non-Euclidean geometry. One must not forget, however,

that very little is gained by such a statement, because we do not know yet

what is to be understood by “visualization of non-Euclidean geometry.” The

mathematician is inclined to postpone these philosophical questions in favor

of  the  mathematical  elaboration  of  geometry.  Nobody  denies  that  the

mathematician  succeeds  in  getting  accustomed  to  non-Euclidean  concepts

that permit fast and effective research for mathematical purposes; but the

question remains whether such an imagining of non-Euclidean relations can

be compared to the phenomenon which we call “visualization” in Euclidean

geometry.















              Fig. 5. Klein’s model of non-Euclidean geometry.



The  mathematicians  have  developed  a  procedure  that  enables  us  to

“visualize” non-Euclidean geometry by means of Euclidean geometry. This

method is based upon the mathematical fact that a non-Euclidean geometry

can be mapped upon Euclidean space. A well-known example will illustrate

this matter. In Fig. 5 a circle is drawn, the interior of which can be used to

visualize the geometry of Bolyai-Lobatschewsky. The same relations hold

between  the chords  of  this  circle  as  between  the straight  lines  of

Lobatschewsky’s geometry, so long as we restrict ourselves to the interior of

the circle. Through the point P a (dotted) chord has been drawn intersecting

AB;  two  more  chords  have  been  drawn  which  do  not  intersect AB.  This

drawing illustrates the axiom of the parallels of Lobatschewsky’s geometry; it

means, in the language of this geometry, the existence of several straightlines through one point which do not intersect a given straight line. It may be

objected that these straight lines, if sufficiently continued beyond the circle,

will intersect the continuation of the straight line AB; they certainly will, but

that does not contradict our assertion. We said only that the relations between

the  chords  in  the interior  of  the  circle  are  identical  with  those  of

Lobatschewsky. Every theorem valid for Lobatschewsky’s straight lines is

valid  for  the  chords  in  the  interior  of  the  circle.  Mathematics  can  show,

furthermore,  that  Lobatschewsky’s  entire  plane  can  be  mapped  upon  the

interior  of  this  circle.  In  this  mapping,  however,  the  concept  of  distance

between two points of Lobatschewsky’s geometry is not coordinated to the

concept  of  distance  between  two  points  of  Euclidean  geometry,  but  to  a

mathematical expression which has a very complicated form in Euclidean
          20
geometry. This expression has the consequence that equal segments on a

chord, in non-Euclidean metric, correspond in Euclidean metric to segments

becoming smaller and smaller as we approach the perimeter of the circle, so

that an infinite number of such “equal” segments are situated on a chord. By

means of this device a theorem of Euclidean geometry is coordinated to every

theorem  of  Lobatschewsky’s  geometry.  Of  course,  the  corresponding

theorems have different meanings in the two geometries. For instance, the

theorem of Euclidean geometry “ There are several chords through one point

which do not intersect a given chord in the interior of a circle“ corresponds to

Lobatschewsky’s theorem ”There are several straight lines through one point

which do not intersect a given straight line.“ A theorem of Lobatschewsky

concerning the congruence of triangles would correspond to a theorem of

Euclidean geometry which states something about the complicated function

that replaces the Euclidean concept of distance.

Are we now able to visualize non-Euclidean geometry? Certainly not. In

this example only the Euclidean elements of the theorems can be visualized.

Instead of one of Lobatschewsky’s theorems, which cannot be visualized, we

visualize one of Euclid’s theorems, and by means of this detour are enabled

to manipulate Lobatschewsky’s geometry with greater ease. Lobatschewsky’s

concepts  become  abbreviations  for  more  complicated  Euclidean

relationships;  we  speak  the  language  of  Lobatschewsky  but  connect  with

these concepts the visual meaning of Euclidean relations. It is like making

intelligible  a  sentence  consisting  of  a  meaningless  chance  combination  of

words by coordinating to them new meanings; it cannot be said, however,

that thereby the original sentence becomes intelligible.  Philosophers have therefore objected to this method of the mathematicians

on the ground that the result is not a visualization of non-Euclidean geometry

but a pointing out of a system of relations between elements of Euclidean

space, a system which is analogous to the system of non-Euclidean relations.

The method was taken to demonstrate that visualization of non-Euclidean

geometry is impossible and must therefore be replaced by a mapping upon

Euclidean  space  as  the  only  one  that  can  be  visualized.  Accordingly,  the

method  of  mapping  has  merely  the  logical  function  of  proving  the

consistency  of  non-Euclidean  geometry  (cf.  §  1).  This  important  result  is

indisputable, but one refused to regard the method of mapping as a visual

representation of non-Euclidean geometry.

This rejection appears to be justified. Therefore, we shall not continue our

investigations in connection with this mathematical treatment of the problem,

but  shall  go  back  to  the  physical  treatment,  where  the  problem  of  the

geometry of real space and of measurement is most conspicuous. In this way

we shall approach the problem of visualization more closely, since we are

dealing with empirical perceptions, not with conceptual constructions. We

shall later come back to the method of mapping described above.

It was explained previously under what circumstances a physicist would

decide to call a space “non-Euclidean.” He would just keep to the measuring

results of rigid rods and let them determine the geometry. Let us visualize his

experiences:  Assume  that  the  observed  geometry  is  the  three-dimensional

analogue to Fig. 2 (p. 11). We draw a two-dimensional cross-section (Fig. 6)

through space: in the plane of our drawing it looks similar to the projection of

surface G upon surface E of Fig. 2. Fig. 6 may be conceived as the top view

of Fig. 2 (cf. however the footnote on p. 52). Imagine meridians drawn from

A′ Fig. 2) upon G which merge into radial straight lines in the plane part of G.

In E these meridians will appear as straight lines emanating from A, as Fig. 6

shows. We must only add that we imagine Fig. 6 as a cross-section through a

similar space so that from A straight lines would emanate in all directions. 
  Fig. 6. Cross-section through a non-Euclidean space. In non-Euclidean

relations BB = CC, although AB = BC and AB = BC. The solid line MN
              12111

is a line of equal distance from DC, the dotted line MN is a straightest line;

                                they do not coincide.



In order to describe our observations we assume that the physicist retains

Euclidean  geometry.  He  then  observes  the  following.  By  means  of  his

measuring rod he made AB = BC = AB = BC. The distance BB is as long
                                              1111

as a solid rod which he laid down. He now places this rod on the line CC. He
                                                                                    1

finds that it goes from C to C, whereas CC is shorter than the rod. In
                                    221

Euclidean geometry CC must be equal to 2 (BB); he will say that the rod
                            11

has grown under the influence of a field of force F. The force has the effect

that the rod becomes longer in tangential position the farther he moves away
                                                                    21
from A, whereas it remains unchanged in radial positions. If he moves still

farther away from A, the expansion increases still more, then decreases, until

it finally disappears and normal relations obtain. The field of force F is found

to be universal, i.e., independent of the material of the measuring rods.

  Corresponding relations were described as the result of measurements onthe surface E of Fig. 2, where they can be explained as a consequence of the

projection. There the transition to non-Euclidean geometry (i.e., a “defining

away” of F) was simpler, because we were concerned with a two-dimensional

problem: we could visualize surface E as having a hump like surface G. The

introduction  of  non-Euclidean  geometry  thus  does  not  cause  any  visual

difficulties in the two-dimensional domain. The situation is different in the

three-dimensional realm. If Fig. 6 is to represent a cross-section through a

space for which the same cross-sections result in all directions originating

from A, we cannot interpret this cross-section as a hump because it would

conflict  with  the  other  cross-sections.  The  cross-section  must  therefore

remain  plane  and  yet  show  the  geometry  of  the  sphere—this  is  the

requirement  contradicting  visualization  that  stops  us  when  we  wish  to

introduce non-Euclidean space. Can we get rid of the contradiction?

We must analyze, therefore, in what respect the interpretation in terms of a

hump constitutes a solution for the two-dimensional problem. How is the

curvature of a surface visualized? What we see are usually the differences

relative  to  three-dimensional  space  rather  than  the  geometrical  relations

within the surface. The distance between a curved surface and an adjacent

plane varies; that is the criterion by which a curvature is visualized. We thus

make use of the third dimension in order to visualize the curvature of the

two-dimensional  manifold.  Let  us  call  this  kind  of  curvature  the exterior

curvature. It is well-known that the exterior curvature of a surface can change

without a change of the interior curvature, i.e., of the geometry of its surface.

The  zone  of  a  sphere  of  elastic  sheet  metal,  for  instance,  can  be  twisted

without  being  expanded,  so  that  the  metal  shows  a  different  shape  while

retaining its inner spherical geometry. (This is not true for the sphere as a

whole.) If a piece of paper is fashioned into a cylinder, it will have an exterior

curvature, but not an interior curvature, because the rolling does not involve

an expansion; the surface of a cylinder has therefore the geometry of the

Euclidean plane. What we usually visualize as the curvature of a surface is its

exterior curvature. If we were to attempt a similar visualization for a three-

dimensional  manifold,  we  would  have  to  imbed  it  in  (at  least)  a  four-

dimensional space. Here lies the difficulty of the problem. It seems to be very

difficult to impose a new dimension upon visualization. Physically this new

dimension would not even be justified, because all physical happenings are

confined  to  the  three-dimensional  realm.  Later  we  shall  investigate  more

precisely in what sense the number of dimensions is determined by physicaloccurrences; it is evident, however, that the introduction of a new dimension

is useless for our problem, because we cannot make any measurements in the

fourth dimension and therefore no criterion analogous to “the distances of the

curved surface from a plane” exists. The problem must be solved in the three-

dimensional domain, i.e., we must try to visualize the interior curvature of

the space.

  There is another reason why we must stay in three dimensions. Euclidean

space can be visualized only in three dimensions. Just as a curved surface can

be characterized by its relations to three-dimensional space, a plane can be

described in terms of three dimensions. For instance: planes are structures the

intersections of which are straight lines. In the same sense in which we speak

of the existence of an exterior and an interior curvature, we may speak of the

absence of an exterior and interior curvature. If we attempted to describe non-

Euclidean space as imbedded in a higher manifold, we could demand the

same for Euclidean space. But since we restrict ourselves to a visualization of

the  absence  of  the  interior  curvature,  we  may  also  restrict  ourselves  to  a

visualization  of  the  interior  curvature  greater  than  zero.  We  wanted  to

compare our ability to visualize one or the other; therefore we must try to

visualize non-Euclidean space in the same manner as Euclidean space, i.e.,

within the three-dimensional domain.

This insight constitutes the first step on the path to a visualization of non-

Euclidean space. We must not demand of an image of non-Euclidean space

properties of an image of a surface in three-dimensional space, but should

look  only  for  analogues  to  properties  of  a  surface  visualized  in  two-

dimensions, i.e., to the interior curvature of a surface.

  What visual experiences in the two-dimensional domain induce us to say

that a surface is curved? Only one feature represents the curvature visually. If

we look at Fig. 6, the distance CC appears longer than BB. If we look at the
                                      21

same measuring rods on the surface G, however, CC appears equal in length
                                                              2

to BB. The visual experience of the curvature in two dimensions consists in
    1

the fact that we judge the relations of congruence differently. It does not

matter that the distance CC does not become twice as long as BB, in spite of
                              11

the equality of the sections on the radial lines; we project the congruence

differently upon the plane. This insight is the second step on our path to

visualize curved space.We can carry through the same procedure for three dimensions. We can

adjust our visualization in such a way that we see the distances BB and CC
                                                                              12

equal in length. We do not need a hump in the surface; we need only to adjust

our conception of congruence. Such an adjustment is permissible because

congruence is a matter of definition. Even Euclidean congruence, which we

often  tacitly  presuppose,  is  based  on  a  definition.  This  definition  too  is

projected by us into space, not discovered in it. The adjustment necessary for

a visualization of a curved space consists in projecting congruence differently

into three-dimensional space.

We have such a strong visual perception of Euclidean geometry because all

our experience with rigid rods constantly teaches us Euclidean congruence.

Let us recall the description of the image-producing function of visualization

in the foregoing section, where we explained that the manner of visualization

is  mainly  conditioned  by  previous  perceptions.  If  we  wish  to  change  our

reaction  to  Euclidean  congruence,  we  shall  have  to  strain  the  normative

function  considerably.  It  would  be  different  if  in  daily  life  we  dealt

occasionally  with  rigid  bodies  that  adjusted  themselves  to  non-Euclidean

geometry. We can imagine what our experiences would be if we suddenly

worked with measuring rods that behaved according to Fig. 6. At first we

would have the feeling that objects changed when transported, and we would

apply the formula G+F. After some time we would lose this feeling and no
                      0

longer perceive any change of the objects when they are transported. Now we

would have adjusted our visualization to a geometry G for which F = 0.

When a near-sighted person puts on glasses for the first time, he sees all

objects distinctly, but they seem to move as soon as he moves. After a while

this feeling wanes, and he has become accustomed to the new way of seeing.

We would have the corresponding experience in a non-Euclidean world; the

moment we no longer see any change in the transported objects, we have

accomplished a visual adjustment.

Let us point to another example of such an adjustment. Automobiles are

frequently equipped on the driver’s side with a convex mirror showing the

lanes in the rear. The untrained person sees the picture in the mirror in a

distorted  way;  moving  objects  seem  to  change  in  shape;  but  the  driver

accustomed  to  the  picture  no  longer  has  the  impression  of  distortion  and

change of shape. A corresponding adjustment is made to the many strange

perspective  relations  of  our  Euclidean  environment;  children  often  do  nothave static pictures: they see a moving train in the size of a toy train and have

the impression that the departing train becomes objectively smaller. Neither

are they able to identify the static picture of distant congruences with the

picture of nearby congruences. Children see the parallel lines of a street as

objectively converging, and when they arrive at the end of the street, they

cannot understand that this is the same spot which they saw from a distance.

Any adjustment to congruence is a product of habit; the adjustment is made

when, during the motion of the objects or of the observer, the change of the

picture is experienced as a change in perspective, not as a change in the

shape of the objects.

  Whoever has successfully adjusted himself to a different congruence is

able to visualize non-Euclidean structures as easily as Euclidean structures

and to make inferences concerning them. I should like to use the problem of

the parallels as an illustration. There are no parallels in Riemannian space; let

us try to visualize this feature. In Fig. 6 the solid line MN is drawn in such a

way that it has everywhere a constant distance from the “straightest line” DC.

In Euclidean language: MN is curved so that it approaches DC more closely

in the middle; a rigid rod put between the lines as a measure of their distance

would  have  a  radial  direction  in  the  middle  of  the  figure  and  would  not

contract, whereas at the sides it would come into a tangential position and

would expand. If we adjust our eyes to the other congruence we can very well

“see” the distance of the two lines as being the same everywhere. We have to

realize  only  that  Euclidean  congruence,  in  spite  of  its  obtrusiveness,  is

likewise  merely  a  definition  which  we  “see  into”  the  plane  of  drawing.

Furthermore, the solid line MN is no straightest line. The dotted line MN is

the shorter connection between M and N. In Euclidean geometry this means:

a  measuring  rod  transported  along  the  dotted  line  passes  in  the  middle

through zones farther removed from A and is therefore longer in these areas;

thus it can be laid down less often on the dotted line. If we readjust our eyes

to the other congruence, we see clearly that the rod can be laid down less

often  along  the  dotted  line.  Consequently:  there  are  no  parallels  in  this

instance; the two descriptions “line of equal distance from a given straight

line”  and  “straightest  line”  do  not  apply  to  the  same  thing.  This  is  the

meaning of the statement that there are no parallels.

In order to explain the drawing of Fig. 6 we have so far used the Euclidean

language. This usage, however, is necessary only in the beginning of attemptsat such an adjustment. Statements like “the rod is longer here than there” are

eventually replaced by statements like “the rod covers here this distance and

there  this  distance,”  and  the  corresponding  distances  are  then  visualized.

Eventually one can forget that from the viewpoint of Euclidean geometry

these distances are different in length. We have similar experiences when we

learn a new language: in the beginning we can only translate from our native

language, and even when we talk, the new words acquire a meaning only

because the translation is always present in our mind. Gradually we learn to

associate a meaning immediately with the new words, to think in the new

language  and  to  express  ourselves  without  the  detour  through  the  native

language. A similar emancipation from the “native geometry” is experienced

with regard to the visualization of non-Euclidean relations.

It is indeed possible to visualize non-Euclidean space by an adjustment of

visualization  to  a  different  congruence.  Euclidean  space  has  thus  lost  its

privileged status. It should not be objected that even this method constitutes a

mapping of non-Euclidean relations upon Euclidean space. Space as such is

neither  Euclidean  nor  non-Euclidean,  but  only  a  continuous  three-

dimensional  manifold.  It  becomes  Euclidean  if  a  certain  definition  of

congruence is assumed for it; this congruence is mathematically characterized

by the fact that the concepts of line of equal distance from a given straight

line and of straightest line are coextensive. As long as we adjust our eyes to

this congruence, we visualize Euclidean space. If a different definition of

congruence  is  introduced  for  which  the  above-mentioned  mathematical

condition does not hold, space becomes non-Euclidean. We are unable to

visualize  it  so  long  as  we  cannot  emancipate  ourselves  from  Euclidean

congruence; with this restriction non-Euclidean relations can only be mapped

upon  the  visualized  Euclidean  space.  Space  will  be  visualized  as  non-

Euclidean if we succeed in visualizing the new definition of congruence as

congruence, i.e., in adjusting our eyes to it. It is, in fact, the result of training

the eyes to adjust to the behavior of solid bodies seen in different angular

perspectives that enables us to visualize Euclidean congruence. If we readjust

the eyes we can similarly visualize non-Euclidean congruence. With this step

we  have  succeeded  in  visualizing  all  that  can  possibly  be  visualized  in

Euclidean or non-Euclidean spaces within the three-dimensional domain. We

have visualized the interior curvature, since interior curvature is nothing but

the deviation from Euclidean congruence.We  can  now  come  back  to  Klein’s  method  of  mapping  the  Bolyai-

Lobatschewsky geometry upon the interior of a circle. The procedure was

based on a coordination of non-Euclidean concepts to Euclidean ones. This

method,  too,  reveals  itself  as  a  redefinition  of  congruence  and  can  be

visualized by a readjustment to a different congruence. The definition of non-

Euclidean congruence is formulated in terms of Euclidean congruence; this

kind of definition results from the nature of the model, which is intended to

establish  a  correspondence  between  the  two  geometries.  The  procedure

represents  the  indirect  method  described  above:  Euclidean  geometry  is

inserted  as  an  intermediate  step  for  the  purpose  of  rendering  possible  a

visualization of the defined congruence. It is somewhat difficult to forget this

detour, but it is possible to conceive the definition of congruence as given

directly by the statement “this distance is congruent to that distance.” Only as

long as Klein’s method is identified with a mapping process is the example

not a representation of Lobatschewsky’s geometry. But it is possible to adjust

to the other congruence, i.e., to see as congruent those sections of the chord

which, in Euclidean language, become smaller and smaller as the periphery is

approached. In this sense Klein’s picture is truly a visual representation of

Lobatschewsky’s geometry.

  Klein’s  model  involves  a  special  difficulty,  because  Lobatschewsky’s

infinite space is mapped upon a finite section of Euclidean space. In order to

accomplish the visualization, we must “forget” everything outside the circle

(in  the  three-dimensional  domain  outside  the  sphere).  We  must  imagine

ourselves inside the circle and remember that the periphery cannot be reached

in a finite number of steps.

The  mathematician  is  thus  correct  in  saying  that  he  has  become

accustomed to visualize non-Euclidean geometry by working with it. But we

can now analyze the process by which he changes his visualization. He has

become accustomed to visualize actually as congruence the definition which

originally  was  given  as  a  function  of  Euclidean  elements,  to  emancipate

himself  from  the  impression  of  a  change,  which  in  the  beginning  affects

everybody working with such congruences, and to project congruence into

space  in  a  manner  different  from  the  one  to  which  he  was  previously

accustomed. If his realization of the definitional character of congruence is

strong enough to direct the image-producing function of his visualization, he

will  succeed.  Our  previous  thesis  was  that  the  apparent  impossibility  ofvisualizing  non-Euclidean  geometry  originated  from  the  fact  that  a

contradictory  presupposition  was  smuggled  in  which  demanded  that  non-

Euclidean  geometry  be  visualized  in  terms  of  Euclidean  elements.  This

presupposition can now be stated more precisely: Euclidean congruence is

the tacit presupposition that influences the image-producing function of our

visualization  when  it  so  stubbornly  rejects  non-Euclidean  geometry.  The

refusal  is  certainly  justified,  because  non-Euclidean  relations  cannot  be

visualized in terms of Euclidean congruence: such a visualization is logically

impossible. Euclidean congruence is the rule presupposed for the game of

chess if certain moves seem to be impossible; an alternative is possible only

when the rule of the game is changed. After such a change has been achieved,

one can read the laws of non-Euclidean geometry, such as the nonexistence

of parallels, from one’s images in the same way as the untrained person takes

Euclidean axioms for granted in his visual images.


§ 12. SPACES WITH NON-EUCLIDEAN TOPOLOGICAL

PROPERTIES

The  concept topological  was  mentioned  previously;  let  us  add  a  brief

explanation. The surfaces of three-dimensional space are distinguished from

each  other  not  only  by  their  curvature  but  also  by  certain  more  general

properties. A spherical surface, for instance, differs from a plane not only by

its roundness but also by its finiteness. Finiteness is a holistic property. The

sphere as a whole has a character different from that of the plane. A spherical

surface  made  from  rubber,  such  as  a  balloon,  can  be  twisted  so  that  its

geometry changes. We can give it an egg-shaped appearance or press it into

the form of a die; but it cannot be distorted in such a way that it will cover a

plane. All surfaces obtained by distortion of the rubber sphere possess the

same holistic properties; they are closed and finite. The plane as a whole has

the property of being open; its straight lines are not closed. This feature is

mathematically  expressed  as  follows.  Every  surface  can  be  mapped  upon

another one by the coordination of each point of one surface to a point of the

other surface, as illustrated by the projection of a shadow-picture by light

rays. For surfaces with the same holistic properties it is possible to carry

through this transformation uniquely and continuously in all points. Uniquely

means: one and only one point of one surface corresponds to a given point of

the  other  surface,  and  vice  versa. Continuously  means:  neighborhood

relations in infinitesimal domains are preserved; no tearing of the surface orshifting of relative positions of points occur at any place. For surfaces with

different  holistic  properties  such  a  transformation  can  be  carried  through

locally, but there is no single transformation for the whole surface. As an

illustration let us take the stereographic projection of the spherical surface

(Fig. 9, p. 69). From the north pole P we draw radial lines to project every

point of the surface of the sphere upon the horizontal plane. In general this

transformation is unique and continuous, although the metrical relations are

distorted; for the point P, however, it shows a singularity. Point P is mapped

upon the infinite; i.e., no finitely located point of the plane corresponds to it.

It can be shown that every transformation possesses a singularity in at least

one point. The surface of the sphere is therefore called topologically different

from the plane. Only a “sphere without a north pole” would be topologically

equivalent  to  the  plane.  This  would  be  a  sphere  where  exactly  one

mathematical point is excluded, whereas all adjacent points are preserved;

such a sphere has a point-shaped hole without a boundary and is no longer a

closed surface.

  Greater  topological  differences  result  when  surfaces  of  a  different

connectivity are considered. The torus is a doubly-connected surface (Fig. II,

Plate 1); it has the shape of a doughnut. Its characteristic feature is that there

exist on it closed curves which cannot be contracted to a point. There are no

such curves on the plane; if we imagine any closed curve on the plane (Fig.

7), a concentric curve can be drawn inside it, a smaller one inside the second

one, and so forth, until the curves are contracted to a point. There are such

curves on the torus, but not every curve has this property. The curves drawn

in Fig. II (Plate 1) cannot be contracted to a point. If we go from curve 1 to

the curves 2 and 3, 2 lies between 1 and 3 just as in Fig. 7 the curve 2 lies

between  the  curves  1  and  3.  But  if  the  transition  to  additional  curves  is

continued on the surface of the torus, we shall finally return to curve 1, since

the curves become larger on the other side of the torus in contradistinction to

the plane, where the curves are contracted to a point. The statements that 3

lies between 2 and 1, or that 1 lies between 2 and 3, are equivalent, because
                            22
the order of betweenness does not depend upon the mutual distances of the

curves; betweenness is purely a relation of order. That naive visualization

believes  curve  2  to  lie  necessarily  between  1  and  3  demonstrates  the

confusion  of  metrical  and  order  relations  and  hence  the  mistake  of  an

uncritical  reliance  on  results  of  such  visualization.  Only  a  conceptual

formulation reveals the errors of naive visualization and enables us to correctthem.  Once  the  conceptual  structure  has  been  understood,  visualization

follows suit: the relation of betweenness on the torus is undetermined for

curves that cannot be contracted to a point, i.e., for three of such curves it is

not  uniquely  determined  which  of  them  lies  between  the  other  two.  (The

relations of betweenness for the ring curves on the surface of the torus are the

same  as  those  of  the  points  on  the  periphery  of  a  circle.)  This

indeterminateness of the betweenness relation has the consequence that such

a curve does not divide the surface of the torus into two separate domains;

between points to the “right” and “left” of the curve there are connecting

lines which remain in the surface of the torus and yet do not intersect the
      23
curve.











 
                Fig. 7. Curves that can be contracted to a point.


















 
          Fig. I. Torus with triangle and intersecting straightest line. 
              Fig. II. Non-intersecting closed curves on a torus.


















 
          Fig. III. Relativity of the enclosure of circles on a sphere.



                                        Plate 1.

The  ring  property  of  the  torus  finds  it  conceptual  expression  in  the

existence of such non-separating curves; this is a holistic property preserved

when the torus is uniquely and continuously mapped upon a different surface.

A  rubber  band,  for  instance,  has  the  holistic  properties  of  the  torus  and

preserves them even if it is twisted and distorted. Due to its other holistic

properties  the  torus  cannot  be  mapped  upon  the  plane  uniquely  andcontinuously,  nor  upon  the  sphere,  from  which  it  is  also  topologically

different.

In topology, mathematics deals with the purely qualitative properties of

geometrical  figures  (which  shows,  by  the  way,  that  the  statement

“mathematics  is  a  purely  quantitative  science”  is  false).  Mathematics

characterizes  topological  equivalence  by  the  possibility  of  transforming

uniquely and continuously one surface into the other, i.e., by a transformation

that  does  not  involve  any  metrical  considerations.  Thus  mathematics

succeeds in formulating analytically those geometrical properties which are

typically visual and seem to defy conceptual formulation. By means of new

concepts  mathematics  teaches  us  how  to  visualize  such  properties.  In

everyday language we call the torus a surface with a hole. But the hole is a

matter of the third dimension; the surface of the torus has no hole. When we

walk  on  the  surface  we  always  find  ourselves  in  an  uninterrupted

environment. Nevertheless, the phenomenon we called the hole of the torus

manifests  itself  in  experiences  on  the  surface;  we  formulated  these

experiences by the existence of curves which cannot be contracted to a point

and among which obtains an undetermined betweenness relation. Even for

the surface of the torus as a whole we must readjust our visualization in a

way similar to the readjustment which we found necessary in connection with

the relation of betweenness. Such considerations show that, indeed, “percepts

without  concepts  are  blind.”  This  striking  remark  of  Kant’s  is  better

illustrated  by  mathematical  analysis  than  by  the  argumentation  of  his

philosophical system.

  Considerations of this kind will therefore be our guide in attempting to

transfer topological properties to the three-dimensional domain. Since we can

reconstruct  the  metrical  properties  of  curved  surfaces  in  the  three-

dimensional  realm,  we  should  also  be  able  to  recognize  their  topological

properties in three-dimensional spaces. The simple connectivity properties of

Euclidean space will be a special case, and we must analyze spaces with

different connectivity properties. In these considerations we need no longer

separate the question of physical realization from that of visualization. Since

we found that the problem of visualization can be solved in connection with

the construction of perceptual experiences, we shall deal with both questions

at once. We shall follow Helmholtz’ method; for “visualize” Helmholtz gave

the definition: “. . . that we are able to imagine the series of perceptions we                                                                              24
would have if something like it occurred in an individual case.” We ask

therefore:  What  would  we  experience  if  space  had  different  topological

properties? By imagining a torus space we shall try to answer this question.

For the presentation of the physical facts to be described we shall use the

same method employed successfully in the preceding section. We assume at

first that the space is Euclidean and describe all observations according to the

scheme G+F. Only later shall we go to F = 0 and G. We wish to construct
          0

the three-dimensional analogue to the nonseparating curves on the surface of

the torus.

Fig. 8  is  to  be  conceived  three-dimensionally,  the  circles  being  cross-

sections of spherical shells in the plane of the drawing. A man is climbing

about on the huge spherical surface 1; by measurements with rigid rods he

recognizes it as a spherical shell, i.e., he finds the geometry of the surface of

a sphere. Since the third dimension is at his disposal, he goes to spherical

shell 2. Does the second shell lie inside the first one, or does it enclose the

first shell? He can answer this question by measuring 2. Assume that he finds

2 to be the smaller surface; he will say that 2 is situated inside of 1. He goes

now to 3 and finds that 3 is as large as 1.

How is this possible? Should 3 not be smaller than 2? If the geometry were

Euclidean this would be the case. But this consideration need not influence

the  observations.  The  physicist  will  explain  his  measuring  results  by  a

contraction of the rod; his rod and also his body contract so that 3 appears

larger than 2. He can avail himself of this hypothesis.

He goes on to the next shell and finds that 4 is larger than 3, and thus

larger than 1. His rod has further contracted; 5 he again finds to be as large as

3 and 1.

But here he makes a strange observation. He finds that in 5 everything is

familiar to him; he even recognizes his own room which was built into shell 1

at a certain point. This correspondence manifests itself in every detail; he sees

his own handwriting on the paper upon the table, and his teacup stands half-

empty where he left it. He is quite dumbfounded since he is certain that he is

separated from surface 1 by the intervening shells. He must assume that two

identical  worlds  exist,  and  that  every  event  on  surface  1  happens  in  an

identical manner on surface 5.                        Fig. 8. Concentric spherical shells.



It  suddenly  occurs  to  him  that  at  this  moment  his  own  double  sits  in

surface 1 puzzling about the same things as he. In order to test this idea he

makes a crucial experiment. He writes down his thoughts on a sheet of paper,

adds a code word, locks the paper in a drawer, puts the key in his pocket, and

leaves shell 5. He investigates it once more and finds that it is completely

enclosed by shell 4. He then returns to 1, making sure all the time that every

shell is situated between two other shells. Arriving at 1 he finds his room,

opens the drawer with the key he put into his pocket, and recognizes on the

slip of paper the same words which he had written down in shell 5.

  What kind of a world will he imagine? If he retains Euclidean geometry he

will  have  to  accept  the  duplication  of  all  happenings  including  his  own

person.  Not  only  a  duplication,  however;  he  would  also  find  that  by

wandering  from  1  in  the  “outside”  direction  or  from  5  in  the  “inside”

direction he encounters the same things. He can never reach the center of all

the shells because as he approaches it all objects as well as his own person

contract  continuously;  the  center,  for  him,  has  the  property  of  an  infinite

distance. The world consists of an infinite number of periodically equivalent

spherical shells. Within each interval, say from 1 to 5, everything happens

according to the usual physical laws, but from there on, the same happenings

recommence.  To  every  point  of  one  interval  of  shells  corresponds  a

respective point in all the other intervals; yet there is no boundary, and all

transitions are continuous.This is a description of experiences in a torus space presented in Euclidean

geometry. We notice that the addition of a universal force F to G does not
                                                                              0

suffice;  in  addition,  a causal  anomaly  occurs,  consisting  in  the  spatial

periodicity  of  all  happenings.  The  interdependence  of  all  events  at

corresponding points cannot be interpreted as ordinary causality, because it

does not require time for transference and does not spread as a continuous

effect  that  must  pass  consecutively  through  the  intermediate  points.  Only

within every shell does normal causality hold; the interdependence of the

shells  is  like  some  kind  of  preestablished  harmony.  It  may  be  left  open

whether this preestablished harmony is to be conceived as an instantaneous

coupling of distant events, i.e., as an action at a distance, spreading without

intermediate effects, or whether it is to be regarded as a parallelism of events

which had “by chance” the same initial conditions and since then have been

running  down  like  synchronized  watches.  Such  a  distinction  is  merely  a
                                  25
difference  in  interpretation.  The  state  of  affairs  underlying  the  two

interpretations is essentially different from the normal laws of nature, and we

speak therefore of a causal anomaly. We may no longer write our formula

“G+F” but
  0




                                                                G+F+A
                                                                  0




where A stands for the causal anomaly.

On  account  of  this  result,  physics  arrives  at  a  strange  situation.  The

principle of causality is one of its most important laws, which it will not

abandon lightly; preestablished harmony, however, is incompatible with this

law.  In  physics  the  transition  to  the  geometry  of  the  torus  will  thus  be

preferred. In this conception the shells 1 and 5 are identical, and the world

does not exist in periodic sections in space, but only once, in the shape of a

torus. With the transition from G to G not only the universal field of force F
                                      0

but also the anomaly A disappears, a consequence which is a strong argument

for preferring G.

The question arises whether this result is compatible with the relativity ofgeometry proved above. This relativity was based upon theorem θ (p. 33)

which stated the possibility of mapping geometries upon each other. As we

said at the beginning of the present section, a unique and continuous mapping

is possible only for geometrical structures having the same topology; theorem

θ  is  correct  only  within  these  limits.  If  topologically  different  spaces  are

mapped upon each other, neighborhood relations will be disturbed at some

places. The mapping of the torus space presented above corresponds in two

dimensions to the case in which the surface of the torus is cut open along one

of the curves drawn in Fig. II (Plate 1) and shaped into a plane circular ring;

under these circumstances the surface of the torus will be deformed and the

points along the cut will be separated from adjacent points. The two edges of

the ring correspond to each other, i.e., they are assigned identical points on

the torus. The continuity is reestablished when an infinite number of smaller

and smaller rings are arranged concentrically within one another; but then the

mapping will cease to be unique in one direction. The violation of continuity

or uniqueness corresponds in the physical interpretation to a causal anomaly,

in this case to the preestablished harmony. If perfect freedom of choice of

geometry is to be preserved as a conditio sine qua non, causal anomalies

must be reckoned with occasionally.

Do we have to renounce Euclidean geometry in such a case? We do not

have to, because no one can prevent us from believing in a preestablished

harmony; if we admit it, Euclidean geometry is saved. We can say, however:

if normal causality is to be retained, Euclidean geometry must under certain

conditions be excluded for physical space. In this case an additional condition

must be normalized, if the statement about the geometry of space is to have

an objective meaning. It is clear that physics will require normal causality, if

it introduces the normalization F = 0. This assumption had been implicitly

made  whenever  the  geometry  of  space  was  discussed;  without  this

assumption  all  statements  about  the  geometry  of  physical  space  would

become ambiguous.

The  torus  space  was  analyzed  thoroughly  because  such  a  discussion

furnishes an important argument against the aprioristic philosophy of space.

It was said above that the aprioristic philosopher cannot be prevented from

retaining  Euclidean  geometry,  a  consequence  which  follows  from  the

relativity of geometry. However, under the circumstances mentioned he faces

a  great  difficulty.  He  can  still  retain  Euclidean  geometry,  but  he  mustrenounce normal causality as a general principle. Yet for this philosopher

causality is another a priori principle; he will thus be compelled to renounce

one  of  his a priori  principles.  He  cannot  deny  that  facts  of  the  kind  we

described could actually occur. We made it explicit that in such a case we

would deal with perceptions which no a priori principle could change. Hence

there are conceivable circumstances under which two a priori requirements

postulated by philosophy would contradict each other. This is the strongest
                                                  26
refutation of the philosophy of the a priori.

  What can be said now about the possibility of visualizing the torus space?

The same considerations that were explained in the preceding section apply

to the metrical deformation of the measuring rods. This deformation can be

visualized  by  means  of  a  readjustment  to  a  different  congruence.  The

identification of the spherical shells 1 and 5 in Fig. 8, however, presents a

greater  difficulty.  It  is  quite  certain  that  we  would  regard  the  individual

objects on the shells as identical; when perceived they are identical in the

usual  sense.  The  problems  of  visualization  arising  in  connection  with  the

mutual enclosure of the spheres will be discussed later.

A topologically different space is the spherical space, which is particularly

interesting in that it does not represent merely a possible form of physical

reality like the torus space, but, according to Einstein, corresponds to real

space. In order to imagine it, we again construct the visual experiences in

terms  of  a  two-dimensional  analogue.  However,  we  shall  choose  much

smaller dimensions for our model than those of the Einsteinian space of the

universe;  otherwise  we  would  not  be  able  to  describe  visual  experiences

noticeably different from those in Euclidean space.

On a spherical surface, as on a plane, every closed curve can be contracted

to a point. Still, there is a difference: the curves can be contracted in both

directions. They can be contracted in the direction of the north pole as well as

in the direction of the south pole, because the surface of the sphere is closed.

On the spherical surface it cannot be stated, therefore, which of two mutually

enclosing circles is the outer one. If two circles 1 and 2 close to the north pole

N (Fig. III, Plate 1) are considered, the larger circle 2 seems to be on the

outside; but circle 2 may be regarded as an intermediate step in the process of

contracting circle 1 to a point, if the circles 3, 4, 5 are contracted in the

direction  of  the  south  pole.  Enclosure  is  a  topological  concept,  and  size

cannot be an indication of enclosure; on the sphere, therefore, we may notspeak of a one-sided enclosure of circles as we would on the plane. The

concept of enclosure is relative; there is only an “enclosure with respect to a

given  point  of  contraction.” The  relativity  of  enclosure  expresses

conceptually the finiteness and closedness of the spherical surface.

This idea must be transferred to three-dimensional space. We should not

look for an analogue to the model in which the finite surface of the sphere is

imbedded in a three-dimensional space; finiteness does not mean a restriction

to an island in a larger surrounding world. If we limit ourselves to the number

of dimensions of the structure itself, there exists nothing else besides it, and

there is no place in this world which we cannot reach. Finiteness is rather

expressed  in  the  specific  topological  relations  of  all  space  points.

Corresponding to an exterior and an interior curvature, exterior and interior

holistic properties must be distinguished; only the interior holistic properties

will be investigated here.

  Spherical surfaces in three-dimensional space correspond to the circles on

the surface of a sphere. Let us analyze their relations of enclosure by mapping

the three-dimensional structure upon Euclidean space, i.e., by drawing the

corresponding distorted figures in Euclidean space. We must proceed in this

manner because we intend to draw the spherical space. “Drawing” means

mapping upon a small area, and since small areas in a spherical space are

nearly Euclidean, the inhabitant of the spherical space will not be able to
                                                                          27
draw pictures different from the ones we are going to present. Yet we are

mostly interested in discovering what he will see. From our drawing we shall

be able to infer his perspective, which is very different from the Euclidean

one.  We  then  can  draw  without  distortion  pictures  that  represent  his

perceptions,  because  we  merely  have  to  draw  plane  figures  which,  when

projected upon the retina, will furnish the same pictures as those actually

occurring in spherical space.

The  mapping  of  the  spherical  space  will  be  accomplished  by  a

stereographic projection. We start with the projection of a two-dimensional

spherical surface. From the center of the projection P (Fig. 9) all points of

this surface will be projected by light rays upon the opposite tangential plane;

the top view of the resulting figures is drawn in the bottom part of Fig. 9; its

center is the point O, opposite to P, whereas P itself is mapped upon infinity.

All  circles  going  through P  become  straight  lines  in  the  plane  of  the

projection. In particular, the great circles going through P become centralstraight lines, i.e., straight lines going through O. The equator QQ′ becomes

the fundamental circle QKQ′K′, the center of which is O. It can be shown,

however, that any circle of the sphere is transformed into a circle of the plane

—a result not intuitively evident, but known to mathematicians since the time

of the Greeks. Great circles, in particular, are mapped as circles intersecting

the fundamental circle QKQ′K′ in two diametrically opposite points, because

they possess this property on the sphere; we call them main circles. In the top

view (i.e., the bottom part) of Fig. 9, two of these main circles are drawn,

constructed as the projections of the great circles SS′ and TT′, whose front

view appears in the top part of Fig. 9.





























 

 
Fig. 9. Stereographic projection of the surface of a sphere. If conceived as a

    cross-section through spheres, the top view (the lower drawing) is the

                    stereographic projection of spherical space.It follows from the unique correspondence given by the mapping that the

system of figures of the plane formed by main circles, the fundamental circle,

and  the  central  straight  lines  satisfies  the  axioms  of  two-dimensional

spherical  geometry.  This  fact  enables  us  to  transfer  the  stereographic

projection  to  three-dimensional  space.  One  would  assume  that  the

corresponding three-dimensional structures satisfy the axiomatic system of

three-dimensional  spherical  space,  and  in  fact  this  can  easily  be

demonstrated.

We need merely conceive the top part of Fig. 9 as a cross-section through a

three-dimensional space; the system of spheres, represented in the drawing by

circles  as  cross-sections,  is  the  stereographic  projection  of  the  spherical

space. In the following table we write down the coordination given by the

projection:



  Element

of the
  Representation in Euclidean space:  
spherical

space:  

  Plane    The fundamental sphere, or plane through the center O   of the

              fundamental sphere ( = central plane), or sphere which intersects

              the fundamental sphere in a great circle ( = main sphere).

  Straight  Straight line through O   ( = central straight line), or circle of

Line  intersection between central plane and main sphere ( = main

              circle).

  Point    Point, including the infinitely distant point.  

  Congruent  Such figures as can be transformed into each other by a

figures  spherical transformation that produces a fundamental sphere of

              the same size.  



Let us sketch briefly an elementary proof that the system of elements on

the right satisfies the axioms of three-dimensional spherical geometry.

It is clear that on every central plane the same relations exist as in the plane

of the top view drawing of Fig. 9, because every circle resulting from the

intersection of a central plane and a main sphere must possess the propertiesof  the  main  circle  defined  above.  (The  circle  of  intersection  between  the

fundamental  sphere  and  a  main  sphere  is  a  great  circle,  according  to  the

definition of a main sphere; it is intersected in two diametrically opposite

points by the great circle resulting from the intersection of a central plane and

the fundamental sphere. Since these points belong both to the central plane

and the main sphere they must be situated on the circle of intersection of

these two elements.)

  Three more theorems are to be proved. First: The main circles of every

main sphere must satisfy the two-dimensional spherical geometry. Though

these main circles are not great circles of the main sphere in the Euclidean

sense, they follow the same system of axioms as the great circles, because

they result from the projection of the totality of great circles of the central

sphere upon the corresponding main sphere. Second: It can be proved that

any two main spheres intersect in a circle the plane of which passes through

O.  It  is  obvious  that  the  straight  line MM′  connecting  the  points  of  the

intersection of two main circles passes through O, since M and M’ correspond

to diametrically opposite points of the sphere indicated in the front view of

Fig. 9. Since the straight line MM′ falls in the plane of the intersection of the

two main spheres, O falls in this plane. Third: It can be proved that two main

circles that have a common point determine a main sphere to which they both

belong. We first show that two main circles α and β (not drawn in Fig. 9) that

have a common point G must have another common point G′, which is the

opposite pole to G. This is proved by the use of a third main circle γ which

lies in the same central plane as α and in the same main sphere as β. We next

construct a sphere through G and G′ and one point each of α and β; the sphere

determined by these four points must contain α and β. It must also be a main

sphere because it passes through G and its opposite pole G′.

The other axioms can easily be read from the model. For instance, the

nonexistence of parallels is represented by the theorem that any two main

circles belonging to the same main sphere must intersect each other. There

are  also  straight  lines  that  are  skew,  i.e.,  which  do  not  intersect,  and  yet

cannot be incorporated into one plane. These are represented by two main

circles linked to each other in the manner of a chain. Two planes must always

intersect, because there is no parallelism for planes; the model shows this

feature as a property of the main spheres.

The uniqueness of the center O, the fundamental sphere, and the centralplanes is only apparent. It is possible to choose a different projection for

which any other given point becomes the center, while one of the former

main spheres becomes the fundamental sphere; other main spheres become

central planes. The translation of one projection into another is achieved by a

transformation  with  reciprocal  radii,  a  so-called  spherical  transformation.

This fact justifies our above definition of congruence and likewise our mode

of speech with regard to infinitely distant points of Euclidean space. The

infinitely distant region of Euclidean space is properly regarded as a plane.

Since, however, it is equivalent to a single point located in finite space—

according  to  the  transformations  given  here—we  speak  of  an  infinitely

distant point.

 

By  means  of  the  stereographic  projection  it  is  easy  to  construct  the

relations  in  spherical  space.  Since  we  are  looking  for  an  analogue  to  the

relativity  of  enclosing  circles, Fig.  III,  (Plate  1)  we  shall  consider  the

following structure.

Let us imagine in space two large spherical shells I and II, made of sheet

metal, which enclose each other and are rigidly connected by beams. An

observer climbs around between the shells; however, he cannot pass through

them  but  is  restricted  to  the  space  between  the  spheres.  He  intends  to

determine which shell is the outside one.

In order to visualize his experience we construct the following figure. In

the stereographic projection we draw two concentric spheres I and II, the top

view  of  which  can  be  seen  in Fig.  10.  Let  us  assume  that  they  are

symmetrical to the fundamental circle indicated by a dotted line; i.e., in the

original sphere (front view of Fig. 9) they correspond to circles of latitude

lying  symmetrically  with  respect  to  the  equator QQ′.  The  observer  is

stationed  at A  on  the  fundamental  circle.  In  order  to  make  our  problem
                                                                                          28
precise we assume that light rays move along straightest lines in space.

Hence we can determine by means of main circles and main spheres what is

visualized by the observer, just as in Euclidean space a representation of his

perceptions is ascertained by means of straight lines and planes. We draw two

main circles through A which are tangential to the two circles I and II; they

furnish the angular perspective for A as do corresponding lines of projection

in Euclidean space. Since in every plane through A and 0 the same relations

hold, we may conceive Fig. 10 as a cross-section through a three-dimensionalfigure which results from a rotation around the axis AOA′. If the view of the

observer is confined to the angular space α he will see shell I; in the angular

space γ he will see shell II, and in the angular space β he will see the empty

space between the shells. The shaded angular space on the right side of the

figure is invisible to him, because it is hidden by the shells; it is the “shadow

area” for A.
























 

 

 

 
  Fig. 10. Stereographic projection of spherical space: perspectives of an

                                    observer at A.



For the purpose of constructing the picture of his perceptions we must

follow the cone of light rays which begins at A; since the stereo-graphic

projection reproduces the original angles, this cone is immediately given by

the  tangents  at A.  It  is  a  double  cone  symmetrical  to  the  line AO.  His

perceptions are obtained by the intersection of this double cone with a plane

of  projection,  which  must  always  be  assumed  to  lie  perpendicular  to  the

direction  of  view. Fig.  12  shows  the  views  which  are  seen  in  the  three

directions: (a) from A towards I, i.e., along the central axis of α; (b) from Aalong a direction perpendicular to the first, i.e., along the central axis of the

adjacent angular space β; (c) from A towards II, i.e., along the central axis of

γ. In these figures the shells are distinguished from each other by different

shadings; Fig. 12a shows the shading of shell I, Fig. 12c that of shell II.
























 

 

 

 

 

 
  Fig. 11. Stereographic projection of spherical space: perspectives of an

                                    observer at A.



In Fig. 11 we have drawn the perspective relations for an observer who

stands next to a shell, at A. The double cone of the received light rays has

degenerated  into  a  plane;  on  one  side  of  the  plane,  rays  from  the  whole

surface of shell I arrive, while the other side is completely hidden by the

adjacent part of shell II. His perceptions are drawn in 

(a) at 4, Fig. 10, looking along the axis of a.
(b) at 4, Fig. 10, looking along the axis of 8.
(c) at 4, Fig. 10, looking along the axis of y.
(d) at 4, Fig. 11, looking towards I.

(¢) at 4, Fig. 11, looking perpendicular to A0.
(f) at O, Fig. 11, looking in any direction.
Fig. 12. Perceptions of an observer in spherical space. Position of observer:



Fig. 12d and 12e; 12d corresponds to the central direction towards I, 12e to

the direction perpendicular to that of 12d.

We  can  now  imagine  the  visual  experiences  of  the  observer.  From  the

space between the shells he sees both spheres as convex surfaces; i.e., by

looking towards the spheres he discovers that light rays do not glide along the

surface, and that within the space between the shells there is no connecting

light path between two points of the same surface. If he stands in the middle

of  the  shell  space  looking  towards  I,  he  sees  in  front  of  him  the  convex

hemisphere of this surface surrounded by free space; when he turns around,

he sees shell II in the same manner, i.e., its convex hemisphere surrounded byfree space. The two diagrams 12a and 12c represent these perceptions, and

we  may  conceive  them  three-dimensionally  as  in Fig.  III  (Plate  1).

Representations of the supporting beams must be added; they intersperse the

shells vertically and are indicated in Fig. 12a—12f. When he turns his head,

the  beams  seem  to  rotate  with  respect  to  each  other  just  as  in  the  usual

Euclidean space the straight-line junctions of the walls and ceiling of a long

room seem to rotate with respect to each other as one turns one’s head from a

direct overhead view to the perspective of the far end of the room. From this

point the total perspective does not show the spheres as enclosing each other,

but  as  situated  side  by  side.  However,  when  the  observer  changes  his

position, the surfaces are bent open in a strange way: with increasing distance

from a shell it flattens out, and the observer sees larger and larger areas, i.e.,

more than its hemisphere. If he stands immediately beside a shell, he sees the

entire surface of the other shell and it looks as flat as a plane. There is no

empty space to be seen from this position of the observer, and the beams lie

in front of the shell. This is the view given in Figs. 12d and 12e; in 12e,

which corresponds to the perpendicular direction, the left half of the field of

vision is hidden by the small part of the convex shell II against which the eye

of the observer is pressed.

The empty space between the shells shows remarkable features. Since all

light rays originating from the observer are gathered in A′ (Fig. 10), a real

optical image of the observer occurs in this spot. It is true that every direction

of view leads to A′, but this holds strictly for one point only; points adjacent

to A′  are  seen  in  one  direction  only.  The  environment  of A′  is  then

coordinated to the total bundle of rays originating from A. Because of the

natural limitation of the angle of vision inherent in the structure of the eye,

only that section will be perceived which is formed by radial lines from the

back of the head of the observer: the observer thus sees the picture of the

back of his own head in a huge distortion all over the space, filling the entire

background. In Fig. 12a—c we must imagine the nonshaded area filled with

an enlarged picture of one’s own hair.

Let us add the following remarks about the accommodation of the eye with

respect to spatial depth. The optical image results normally from the fact that

a bundle of divergent light rays originating from the object hits the lens of the

eye and is there changed into a convergent bundle, the point of convergence

of which, or point of the image, lies beyond the focus. In spherical space, abundle of light rays emanating from an object-point at a distance greater than

a quadrant converges upon the eye. The lens gathers such rays into a point

lying between the lens and the focus. The pattern of the rays is the converse

of the one resulting for a magnifying glass. Consequently, the lens of the eye,

when looking at such distant points, must be flattened to a higher degree than

corresponds, for the normal case, to the adjustment to infinity. The normal

eye  will  therefore  be  near-sighted  in  spherical  space  and  require  the

correction of concave glasses. In binocular vision the two eyes must diverge

for the same reason. This means that for depth perception the same criteria

exist as in ordinary space, however in a more pronounced fashion, and the

judgment of depth is therefore possible in the same way as in normal vision.

The image of the back of the head of the observer is distinctly visible as the

most distant object; this impression is confirmed if closer objects partially

hide the back of the head.

 

  Measurements by means of rigid rods would confirm the symmetry of the

whole picture. An observer would find the two spherical shells equal in size,

and the connecting beams equal in length.

Let us go a step further and analyze the perceptions in the interior of the

shells. The observer might discover a window and look through into the shell.

He sees very clearly the interior of the shell; the beams run crosswise from

the wall toward the center where they intersect. This aspect only confirms the

symmetry, because on opening a window in the other shell he observes the

same phenomena: he sees the interior of the shell and the beams meeting in

the center. The greatest surprise, however, awaits him when he climbs into

one of the shells. Let us assume that he has discovered additional windows in

the shell and has opened them; if he stands now in the center of the shell, i.e.,

at the point of intersection of the beams, he sees not only the shell all around

him but also, through the open windows, corresponding wall sections of the

other shell at the same distance in every direction, so that he finds himself at

the same time in the center of the second shell. This perception is represented

in Fig. 12f;  for  every  direction  of  view  the  picture  is  the  same. Fig.  11

furnishes the explanation for what is seen by an observer standing at O. The

shaded shell of Fig. 12f is supposed to be concave; here the visual impression

of the concentric position of the shells corresponds precisely to the respective

perceptions in Euclidean space. If the observer occupies an eccentric position(at B′, Fig. 11) he also sees himself in the interior of both shells, i.e., from

this position too, he looks in every direction, first at shell I and then through

the windows at shell II behind it. The picture of the second shell, however, is

strangely distorted, since, as is evident from the study of the main circle

through B and B′ in Fig. 11, the larger calotte of shell II appears behind the

smaller  calotte  of  shell  I,  and  vice  versa.  In  the  interior  of  shell  II  the

corresponding pictures would be obtained in inverse order; an observer at B

has the same perceptions as an observer at B′ (Fig. 11), only the order of the

shells  is  changed.  The  perceptions  corresponding  to Fig.  12f,  where  the

shading would have to be exchanged, belong to an observer whose position in

the stereographic projection (Fig. 11) lies at infinity.

The observer has the following visual experience of the relativity of the

mutual enclosure of the shells: At one time he sees shell I inside shell II; at

another time he sees shell II inside shell I; besides, there are intermediate

positions from which he sees the two shells not as concentric but as side by

side with separate centers.

So far we have proceeded by developing from the properties of spherical

space the perceptions of an observer stationed in such a space. We shall now

use  the  opposite  method.  Assume  that  an  observer  has  the  perceptions

described  above;  what  would  he  infer?  Only  in  this  form  is  the  problem

accessible to an epistemological analysis. So long as we start from a certain

state of the universe and infer perceptions from it, an aprioristic philosophy

may contend for any number of reasons that such a state of the universe does

not  exist.  As  soon  as  we  start  from  perceptions,  however,  the  objection

disappears, because nothing can be prescribed for perceptions. No a priori

postulate can exclude the possibility that some person may at some time have

certain  perceptions.  Only  the interpretation  of  such  perceptions  is

controversial. The interpretation concerns the inference from the perception

to the physical world; this inference is not unique, because there are different

geometrical interpretations for the same perceptual data. Let us study the two

most  important  interpretations,  those  of  Euclidean  space  and  of  non-

Euclidean spherical space.

The  interpretation  is  simple  for  non-Euclidean  geometry.  In  this

interpretation we deal with spherical space; there is no absolute “exterior” for

the spheres; each of them is the exterior one with respect to the corresponding

point of contraction. The two points of contraction are given in our model bythe centers of the scaffolds. The space is finite, but nowhere has the character

of an island, i.e., every point can be reached. Even a visual image is possible;

for each of the two spherical shells we may employ the old concepts of inside

and outside and may imagine them as curved in the conventional sense. It is

true that the visual images change and that there does not exist one visual

image reproducing the entire space, such as exists for the two-dimensional

spherical surface that can be perceived in its entirety at a glance. However,

such  a  plurality  of  images  occurs  merely  because  we  ourselves  are  the

observers, standing in the interior of the space and thus may not expect a

visual image which necessarily can result only from being imbedded in a

higher  dimensional  manifold.  One  visual  image  comprehending  the  entire

space is not even possible in Euclidean three-dimensional space. It is quite

possible, however, to attain a general impression of spherical space by visual

integration, so to speak, i.e., by looking around and pacing it off. The visual

adjustment is achieved when the resulting changes in the perceptions—the

above described transition from a convex surface by way of the plane, to a

concave surface—are no longer experienced as a folding inside out of the

surface but as a change in perspective.

For the interpretation in Euclidean geometry we need more complicated

images in order to account for the perceptions depicted above. In Euclidean

geometry only one side of each shell can be considered a closed space; on the

other side is the surrounding exterior space. The two shells can be conceived

as being concentric or as lying side by side; in the first case the exterior space

would correspond to the interior of a sphere in the non-Euclidean conception;

in the second case, to the space between the shells. Universal forces have to

be assumed for this interpretation: metrical deformations of rods and light

rays cause deviations of our perceptions from the foregoing description. It is

a representation of the objective world which treats the manner in which we

draw spherical space in Figs. 9—11 as binding for space itself: the space is

actually Euclidean, but the measuring instruments change their size when

transported,  and  light  rays  travel  along  curved  paths  so  that  deviating

perceptions result. Whereas such a conception is natural for the drawing—

here the relations of congruence of rigid rods and the paths of light rays for

small dimensions are unlike the corresponding relations for large dimensions

—it  assumes  a  peculiarly  empty  character  for  large  dimensions.  The

difference in the relations of congruence cannot be interpreted as the result of

differential  forces  upon  the  instruments  of  measurement,  but  must  beexplained  as  a  universal  deformation,  which  affects  all  things  without

exception and cannot be measured as a deviation from an actual physical

state.

The essential difficulty of the Euclidean interpretation lies in the fact that

the infinity of this space is physically attainable. This interpretation need not

necessarily localize infinity at a marked point such as the point of intersection

of the beams; since this point is too obviously realized, the attempt will be

made to assume infinity in another domain of this space. The physicist would

proceed by carrying a beam of finite thickness through the entire space; the

interior of this beam would have to reach every point of the space at least

once. Euclidean geometry will then have to admit that a material structure of

previously finite dimensions can be laid down in such a way that it is situated

at the same time in a finite and an infinite region without breaking. It must

assume, furthermore, that a body can run through infinite Euclidean space in

a finite time and return from the other side to the point of its departure. This

conception contains causal anomalies; we are confronted with the same case

G+F+A which we described above and which, if admitted, complicates the
0

causal relations unnecessarily.

For physics there is a definite distinction between finiteness and infinity;

whereas  the  mathematician  speaks  of  the  infinitely  distant  plane  or  the

infinitely distant circle and manipulates them just like finite structures, the

physicist  with  his  real  measuring  rods  is  bound  to  finiteness.  He  cannot

coordinate  physical  things  to  concepts  of  infinite  structures;  rather,  by

translating  statements  about  infinite  structures  into  statements  about  finite

structures, he must find out whether they possess physical meaning under

these conditions. Infinity of space to him means that there are no limits for

the laying down of measuring rods and that by laying down measuring rods

on a straight line the point of departure will not be reached after a finite

number of operations. But it is a violation of all previous notions of causality

underlying  all  our  physical  statements  to  say  that  a  body  runs  through

infinity, or that a body located at infinity causally affects bodies located at

some finite point. There may be cases that would compel us to accept such

causal anomalies; but so long as it is possible to exclude anomalies we shall

retain normal causality in the sense of a postulate. Similarly, the physicist

cannot admit transformations that map infinity upon a finite domain; for him,

only  one  of  the  two  geometries  related  by  such  a  transformation  isadmissible; which one it is, is decided by experience. In mathematics the

concept of topology is ordinarily used in a wider sense than was defined

above; in the transformation group based on topological equivalence, certain

singularities  are  admitted  so  that  topologically  the  difference  between
                                        29
finitude  and  infinity  disappears.  For  physics,  however,  the  narrower

concept  of  topology  must  be  carried  through,  strictly  limited  to

transformations  that  are  everywhere  continuous  and  unique  in  both

directions.

  Another  objection  seems  to  result  from  the  mathematical  fact  that  the

anomaly occurs strictly at only one point, as illustrated by the stereographic

projection of the sphere described above; and what occurs at a mathematical

point cannot be determined by the physicist because of the limits of exactness

of measurement. If in the space considered the infinite point has not been

found, one can suppose it to be within an area which appears small to us

because of the increased size of all physical objects, and which we did not

occupy  with  matter  while  carrying  around  our  beam;  this  point  may,  for

instance, be in the pores of a wooden beam of the scaffold. This contention

neglects the fact that in physics results may be interpreted in a way different

from  those  in  mathematics.  Physics  may  replace  the  inexactness  of

measurement  by  a  probability  inference:  if,  under  the  assumption  of  a

spherical space, I cannot find an anomaly, whatever experiments I perform, I

assume  with  probability  that  it  does  not  exist.  Probability  statements  are

indispensable once we agree to base our decision about the geometry upon

measurements. The assertion of a spatial singularity has physical meaning

only if it is in principle confirmable by inductive methods, a requirement

which  holds  just  as  well  for  assertions  about  the  infinity  of  space.  The

statement that physical space has the topological properties of spherical space

is just as physically meaningful as a statement about metrical properties of

space. Typology  is  an  empirical  matter  as  soon  as  we  introduce  the

requirement that no causal relations must be violated; whether there occur

causal anomalies can be decided by the usual inductive methods of physics.

An example of how clearly such anomalies would be recognized consists in

the experiences we would have if the surface of the earth were “redefined” as

a plane. If such a “definition” were topologically admissible, there would be

some  point  on  the  surface  of  the  earth  which  we  could  not  cross.  It  is

physically meaningful, however, to say that there is no such point, although

not every point on the surface of the earth has been reached by man.Our considerations have shown that the determination of the topological

properties of space are closely related to the problem of causality; we assume

a topology of space that leads to normal causal laws. Only in this way does

the  question  about  the  topology  of  space  constitute  a  well-determined

question. It must be called an empirical fact that there is one kind of topology

that leads to normal causality; and it is of course an empirical fact which

topology yields this result. Later we shall discuss a still closer connection

between space and causality. (§ 27, § 42, § 44.)


§ 13. PURE VISUALIZATION

We  began  the  investigation  of  this  chapter  with  a  presentation  of  the

mathematical development of geometry. This development showed that the

problem  of  space  bifurcates  into  a  mathematical  and  a  physical  problem.

Inquiring into the problem of the validity of the axioms, we turned to the

physical problem of space. The mathematical problem of the nature of space

was  solved  insofar  as  it  was  demonstrated  that  axiomatic  systems

contradictory  to  each  other  are  equally  acceptable,  since  mathematics

concerns itself with the logical relations within these systems and not with

the truth of the axioms themselves. We mentioned, however, in § 1 that this

conception requires further analysis. We can now undertake this analysis,

which concerns the problem of visualization of geometry. Our study of the

physical problem of space has already led us to questions of this kind.

  Euclidean geometry can easily be visualized; this is the argument adduced

for the unique position of Euclidean geometry in mathematics. It has been

argued that mathematics is not only a science of implications, but that it has

to  establish  a  preference  for  one  particular  axiomatic  system.  Whereas

physics  bases  this  choice  on  observation  and  experimentation,  i.e.,  on

applicability to reality, mathematics bases it on visualization, the analogue to

perception in a theoretical science. Accordingly, mathematicians may work

with the non-Euclidean geometries, but in contrast to Euclidean geometry,

which is said to be “intuitively understood,” these systems consist of nothing
                          3031
but “logical relations” or “artificial manifolds”. They belong to the field

of  analytical  geometry,  the  study  of  manifolds  and  equations  between

variables,  but  not  to  geometry  in  the  real  sense  which  has  a  visual

significance.

In  our  previous  investigations,  we  have  examined  the  question  ofvisualization  and  offered  a  visual  illustration  of  non-Euclidean  geometry,

even for topologically different spaces. However, we did not state clearly

whether  we  were  concerned  with  physical  or  mathematical  visualization.

Since we have discussed so far only the physical problem of space, it may be

argued that both our analysis of visualization based on the behavior of rigid

bodies and our illustration of non-Euclidean geometry in terms of possible

experiences deal only with physical visualization. And it may be maintained

that there exists something like a mathematical visualization, which is not

covered by our considerations. This question requires a further investigation.

It is true that in order to make possible a visualization of non-Euclidean

geometry  we  started  with  the  behavior  of  real  objects  and  constructed

imagined  experiences,  which  led  us  to  pictorial  representation  of  non-

Euclidean relations. However, in choosing this path, we followed the road

which human visualization has taken throughout its natural development. In

the behavior of rigid bodies and light rays, nature has presented us with a

type  of  manifold  which  approximates  Euclidean  laws  so  closely  that  the

visualization of Euclidean space was exclusively cultivated. There can be no

serious doubt that we are here concerned with the developmental adaptation

of  a  psychological  capacity  to  the  environment,  and  that  a  corresponding

development would have led to non-Euclidean visualization, had the human

race  been  transplanted  into  a  non-Euclidean  environment.  Pedagogically

speaking,  the  best  means  to  accomplish  a  visualization  of  non-Euclidean

geometry is therefore to picture a non-Euclidean environment. Though we

see  at  first  only  changes  of  bodies  in  Euclidean  space,  this  experience  is

gradually transformed, as was shown, into a genuine visualization of non-

Euclidean space, in which bodies no longer change.

  Does this analysis disprove the existence of a special type of mathematical

visualization?  Certainly  not  without  further  consideration.  Reference  to  a

biological habit does not supply an epistemological argument. We must ask

what are the actual laws of the human mind, independent of their historical

development. One should not forget, however, that the formulation of spatial

visualization  as  a  developmental  adaptation  is  itself  already  based  on  an

epistemological assertion, which it merely tends to emphasize, namely, the

assertion  that  there  exists  a  real  space  independent  of  those  spaces

represented by mathematics, that it is a scientifically meaningful question to

ask  which  of  the  mathematically  possible  types  of  spaces  corresponds  to                                                32
physical  space,  and  that  the  “harmony”  of  nature  and  reason  does  not

depend on an inner priority of Euclidean space, but that, on the contrary, the

priority depends on this “harmony.” Arguments that present Euclidean space

as “reasonable” or “given by nature” must not be employed to establish a

preference for a certain kind of mathematical space. They may be used in

favor of the choice of Euclidean space for physics, in which case we might

add that they also speak in favor of the opposite choice, since physical space

is non-Euclidean according to Einstein. The visual preference for Euclidean

space therefore cannot depend on its special suitability for the visualization of

natural objects, but rather on an inherent property that has no connection with

the outside world.

To avoid this indefinite concept of inherent property, a justification of this

preference  was  attempted  on  logical  grounds  based  on  the simplicity  of

Euclidean geometry. Euclidean space has indeed certain logical advantages.

Logically speaking it is simpler than non-Euclidean spaces. This simplicity is

not very important, however; it is simpler in the same sense as for instance a

circle is simpler than an ellipse. To claim that an ellipse is a mathematically

“unreasonable” figure, inferior to a circle which belongs to a higher realm of

mathematical  reality,  would  mean  a  return  to  the  mathematics  of  the

Pythagoreans, who used arguments much closer to religious aesthetics than to

mathematical science. The simplicity of Euclidean geometry is irrelevant for

the philosophical problem of geometry, not only within physics (compare §
                                    33
8), but also within mathematics.

A logical priority of Euclidean geometry is therefore not justifiable in the

sense of an epistemological superiority, and we can only base this supposed

priority on a special type of geometrical visualization that has nothing to do

with the perception of physical things. It is in this sense that Kant invented
                                      34
the concept of pure visualization as opposed to empirical visualization. He

too, however, was fully aware of the fact that pure visualization must be

related in some fashion to empirical visualization. It is in his terminology the

form of empirical visualization, and therefore pure visualization without any

reference to reality is an empty notion with no epistemological significance.

Since we have shown that empirical visualization can be changed to conform

to non-Euclidean geometry, the same must be possible for pure visualization.

We  must  indeed  consider  our  previous  considerations  to  apply  to  pure

visualization. Our analysis of the visualization of Euclidean geometry in § 9holds  for  pure  visualization  as  well  as  for  empirical  visualization.  The

investigation  was  concerned  with  abstractions  and  did  not  refer  to  rigid

measuring  rods.  \  What  else  could  really  be  meant  by  geometrical

visualization but those, structures of the imagination that appear when we

think, for instance, about the diagonals of a pentagon or the shape of a closed

curve on a torus? If we thought in § 11 that the non-Euclidean congruence

was realized by means of material measuring rods, this too was thinking in

pictures of the imagination, since the measuring rods were never actually

produced.  The  fiction  of  handling  material  things  merely  facilitated

visualization. We have therefore constructed pictures in the frame of pure

visualization  just  as  we  draw  Euclidean  triangles  on  a  blackboard.  The

drawing  of  geometrical  figures  is  indeed  nothing  but  the  realization  of

geometrical figures through material things, which we have continually used

in our previous discussions. Small particles of chalk are piled on a wooden

board to form a triangle—what else is this but physical geometry? Every

instructor  who  illustrates  the  Euclidean  laws  of  congruence  by  drawing

figures  on  a  blackboard,  or  even  by  cutting  out  paper  triangles,  achieves

“pure visualization” through empirical visualization. He can do this because

pure visualization is nothing but a sensible quality which is realized in sense

perception.  This  consideration  explains  Kant’s  terminology  of  “form  of

visualization.”  It  expresses  the  same  kind  of  blending  of  subjectivity  and

objectivity that occurs in color vision, which is subject to a multi-dimensional

ordering  and  which  can  be  experienced  or  reproduced  only  in  sense

perception.  Visual  forms  are  not  perceived  differently  from  colors  or

brightness. They are sense qualities, and the visual character of geometry

consists in these sense qualities.

  Objections have been raised against this idea on the ground that immediate

sense impressions are not what is to be understood by pure visualization. The

sense  impression  of  two  rails  is  not  that  of  parallelism,  whereas  we  do

recognize  the  rails  as  parallel  in  pure  visualization.  One  should  therefore

distinguish  between  perceptual  space  and  the  space  of  pure  visualization.
                                      35
This objection, raised by Driesch, is not tenable. The fact that the two rails

do not appear parallel, although they are parallel lines in an objective sense,

proves nothing against the perceptual space. Rather we must ask whether

there are any parallels at all in perceptual space. The answer to this question
                                                    36
has been given long ago by psychologists. There are indeed parallels in

perceptual space, but their form in an objective physical space is that of twoslightly curved diverging lines. We do not find a correspondence between

objective and subjective parallelism, but rather a coordination of diverging

lines in the objective space to parallel lines in the perceptual space, and of

parallel  lines  in  the  objective  space  to  converging  lines  in  the  perceptual

space.  All  this  is  of  course  completely  irrelevant  for  the  problem  of

visualization. There do exist parallel lines in perceptual space and this fact

alone  is  essential  since  it  eliminates  the  need  for  a  distinction  between

perceptual  space  and  visualization  space.  Indeed,  if  we  call  the  two  rails

parallel, this can mean only two things. First, they satisfy certain physical

conditions;  when  we  measure  the  distance  between  them  with  a  rigid

measuring rod the result is everywhere the same. Second, if this physical

property  is  to  be  visualized,  its  representation  has  to  be  similar  to  the

phenomenon of parallelism in perceptual space. It does not matter that the

immediate sense impressions of rails do not present this phenomenon. Our

assertion  is  not  concerned  with  the  perceptual  image  of  rails  but  is  a

statement about their objective relation to each other, clarified by means of a

visual picture. We therefore claim that the objective state of the rails does not

correspond to the impression of convergence as seen in our perceptual image,

but  to  the  impression  of  parallelism  that  we  might  obtain  from  certain

objectively diverging lines.

We  are  frequently  faced  with  the  necessity  of  looking  for  the  picture

required  for  the  visualization  of  an  object,  not  in  the  perception  of  this

particular object, but in a different perceptual image. When we see the lines

of an illuminated advertising sign from a great distance, they appear to be

completely continuous. In spite of that we know that this is not the “correct”

visualization of the lines. We should rather imagine the picture of a string of

pearls,  which  describe  how  the  lights  would  appear  when  viewed  from

nearby. Or consider optical illusions. Here too, the perceived visual image is

not  that  which  is  to  be  coordinated  to  the  objective  situation.  The

phenomenon of the convergence of parallels is nothing but an optical illusion.

There  can  be  no  doubt  that  in  optical  illusions  we  do  experience  the

visualization of the wrong picture. It is not “wrong in itself,” but we can

assert a discrepancy between the perceived picture and the objective state.

This  discrepancy  again  proves  absolutely  nothing  against  the  fact  that  all

visualizations are merely sense qualities of the perceptual space. Where else

could we find the origin of specific visualizations? No visualization is needed

for the objective assertion that the two rails are parallel. It is sufficient to statethe  results  of  measurements  with  rigid  rods.  Of  course,  perceptions  are

needed to accomplish these measurements, but for imaginary measurements

they  can  be  replaced  by  visual  images.  In  these  visual  images,  however,

which can be conceived as “close-ups” of the measuring rod and small parts

of the rails, the visual parallelism of the rails does not appear, although all of

them together justify the assertion of objective parallelism. If the parallelism

is also to be visualized, we must supplement our assertion by the description

of certain qualities with which we are familiar from perceptual space.

 

  Though  we  have  used  previously  the  concept  of  perceptual  space,  we

cannot fail to mention that this term, though frequently employed, is rather

unfortunate. Perceptual space is not a special space in addition to physical

space, but physical space which we endow with a special subjective metric.

(Each sense has a different metric.) Once this fact is realized, our argument is

easily  understood.  That  perceptual  space  and  physical  space  ought  to  be

distinguished implies that physically equal distances in physical space are not

always experienced as such. There is no third kind of space, the space of

visualization, because apart from the definition of congruence in physics and

that based on perception there is no third one derived from pure visualization.

Any such third definition is nothing but the definition of physical congruence

to which our normative function has adjusted the subjective experience of

congruence.

 

  Finally, our example shows how much the visual experience of parallelism

is determined by logical considerations and hence is not an absolute datum.

The experiments of Blumenfeld indicated that the same lines, produced by a

series of lamps in a dark room, were perceived sometimes as parallel and

sometimes as divergent, depending upon the feature to which the observer

attended.  When  the  lamps  were  adjusted  under  the  directive  of  the

“directional  condition”  of  parallelism,  objective  curves  resulted  different

from those obtained when the lamps were adjusted according to the “distance
            37
condition.”  It  is  exactly  this  variability  of  sense  experience  which  was

employed  in  our  visualization  of  non-Euclidean  geometry.  Whereas  the

subjects in the psychological experiments mentioned were mostly passive,

and  restricted  their  activities  to  self-observation,  the  visualization  of  non-

Euclidean  geometry  depends  on  an  active  concentration  on  the  visualexperience. There can be no doubt that this active participation leads to a

wider range of possible variations of visualization.

The investigations of § 11, which led to the visualization of non-Euclidean

geometry  through  an  adjustment  in  the  perception  of  congruences,  are

therefore  applicable  to  mathematics  in  the  same  fashion  as  to  physics.

Although we have simplified the adjustment psychologically by connecting it

with the idea of measuring rods of varying properties of congruence, this is

by no means necessary. We could have worked directly with visual qualities

by  replacing  the  idea  of  the  transport  of  measuring  rods  by  the  visual

directive: “These distances which I see should be considered congruent.” For

abstract mathematics this procedure is equivalent to a physical coordinative

definition.

This  equivalence  has  been  obscured  by  a  certain  mathematical

complication  which  may  create  the  impression  that  special  conditions

underlie the space of mathematical visualization and that a change in the

definition  of  congruence  will  not  produce  a  corresponding  change  in  the

visualized laws. In contrast to the physicist, the mathematician does not use

the visual directive “this distance,” since it would never lead him to precise

visualizations. Estimates by sight are too inaccurate in an ideal geometry to

take over the function of the transportation of measuring rods as used in

practical geometry. Rather, the mathematician uses an indirect definition of

congruence, making use of the logical fact that the axiom of the parallels

together  with  an  additional  condition  can  replace  the  definition  of

congruence.  He  can  therefore  avoid  the  otherwise  necessary  reference  to

visual distances in his definition of congruence. Instead he introduces other

basic visual elements which can be visualized more easily and which also

lead to a determination of congruence. These other elements are the analogue

to the physical components of the coordinative definition.

It can easily be seen that the parallel axiom indeed presents a determination

of congruence. In Fig. 13, let AB be parallel to A′B′ and AA′ parallel to BB′.

We can then define: AB is congruent to A′B′. With the same definition we

obtain  from  the  dotted  parallel  lines: A′B′  congruent  to BC,  and  also AB

congruent to BC congruent to CD, etc., since the concept of congruence is

transitive.  The  Euclidean  axiom  of  parallelism  therefore  determines  the

congruence along any straight line. This is the reason why the Riemanian

generalization of geometry, through the concept of congruence, leads to thesame  type  of  geometry  as  the  generalization  introduced  by  Bolyai-

Lobatschewsky  through  a  change  in  the  parallel  axiom.  Of  course,  the

parallel axiom alone is not sufficient to define the comparison of differently

directed line segments. As long as we restrict ourselves to the parallel axiom,

it is impossible to decide whether AB is equal or unequal to AA′. For such a

comparison  we  must  introduce  the right  angle,  which  is  the  previously

mentioned additional condition; i.e., a directive must be given which decides

whether  the  four  angles  resulting  from  two  straight  intersecting  lines  are

equal or not. Now we can construct rectangles, and their diagonals furnish the

definition for the equality of differently directed line segments.

The  visual  elements  introduced  in  connection  with  the  definition  of

congruence in place of a direct comparison of length are therefore parallelism

and the right angle. These are the perceptual elements of the coordinative

definition. Whenever a mathematician forms visual representations, he uses

coordinative  definitions  just  like  a  physicist,  with  the  difference  that  his

coordinated objects are not physical objects but visual qualities. The fact that

we  are  dealing  here  with  a  coordination  is  illustrated  by  the  following

considerations. Our definition of congruence in terms of these elements is

expressed by the obvious fact that we can dispense with ruler and compass

and compare line segments on a drawing board with straightedge and right
                38
triangle alone. It is exactly this type of definition of congruence which we

have in mind when we speak of pure visualization of Euclidean geometry,

thus  avoiding  a  direct  comparison  of  length.  The  fact,  however,  that  this

procedure can also be represented by means of physical objects, namely a

straightedge  and  right  triangle,  characterizes  it  as  a  coordination.  We

coordinate to the concepts of parallel and of right angle visual qualities which

we  know  from  the  perceptual  experiences  of  the  physical  objects,

straightedge  and  right  triangle.  The  coordinative  definition  required  for

congruence  is  here  established  in  a  different  fashion.  We  use  an  indirect

method. There is of course no objection to readjusting our visualization. Just

as we adjusted our perception of congruence in the previous example, we can

similarly adjust our perception of parallelism and rectangularity. For instance,

we could consider the lines in Fig. 13 as intersecting at right angles which

would make angle AA′B′ equal to angle A″A′B′. The visual picture of Fig. 13

is then an admissible and noncontradictory representation of a rectangular

network, with the only shortcoming that it does not fit the behavior of the

straightedge  and  right  triangle.  The  visual  elements  of  a  mathematicallyconceived  space  can  therefore  also  be  adjusted;  and  if  we  feel  an  inner

resistance  against  such  a  change,  this  too  is  due  to  an  adaptation  to

experiences with rigid bodies.



















 
          Fig. 13. Definition of congruence by means of parallels.



We  have  to  mention  another  reason  for  the  difficulties  arising  in

connection with this adjustment. The concept of congruence in Euclidean

geometry is not exactly the same as that in non-Euclidean geometry. Each

geometrical concept contains implicitly all the geometrical axioms. This fact

will become clearer in the next section, where we shall explain the nature of

an implicit definition. Accordingly, the content of a geometrical concept is

determined only by the totality of the axiomatic system, and thus the concepts

of Euclidean congruence and of non-Euclidean congruence are not identical,

but play equivalent roles in the axiomatic systems. In connection with our

previous remarks regarding the relation between congruence and parallelism,

we  can  illustrate  this  point  as  follows:  “Congruent”  means  in  Euclidean

geometry the same as “determining parallelism,” a meaning which it does not

have  in  non-Euclidean  geometry.  What  is  actually  meant  by  equality  of

length? First it asserts a one-to-one correspondence between all points of the

segments;  this  concept  determines  the  higher  class.  The  corresponding

specific difference states in Euclidean geometry: “... such that the resultingmetric corresponds to the axiom of the parallels.” We can formulate this more

precisely: Euclidean equality is a unique coordination of line segments, such

that a curve which is equidistant from a straight line is also a shortest line and

such that two shortest lines which are not equidistant will intersect at a finite

distance.  The  first  condition  distinguishes  Euclidean  geometry  from

geometries with positive curvature, and the second from those with negative

curvature. It is thus clear that the characterization of non-Euclidean geometry

must be different. Common to the two geometries is only the general property

of  one-to-one  correspondence,  and  the  rule  that  this  correspondence

determines  straight  lines  as  shortest  lines  as  well  as  their  relations  of

intersection. Strictly speaking, we cannot say that the equality defined by the

drawing of Fig. 6 (page 51) corresponds to the ordinary concept of equality.

It corresponds only to the equivalent concept of a non-Euclidean geometry.

This  consideration  expresses  what  we  have  called  “presupposing  tacit

conditions.” If we feel a resistance to accepting the congruence defined by

Fig. 6 as an equality we react in this manner, because we miss in this equality

the element which “determines parallelism.” This goal, however, we cannot

achieve, because it is logically impossible, and therefore must be renounced

in any attempt to adjust our visualization to a non-Euclidean congruence.

We can summarize our results as follows:

  There is no pure visualization in the sense of the a priori philosophies;

every  visualization  is  determined  by  previous  sense  perceptions,  and  any

separation into perceptual space and space of visualization is not permissible,

since the specifically visual elements of the imagination are derived from

perceptual space. What led to the mistaken conception of pure visualization

was rather an improper interpretation of the normative function, which we

have recognized in § 9 as an essential element in all visual representations.

Indeed,  all  arguments  which  have  been  introduced  for  the  distinction  of

perceptual space and space of visualization are based on just this normative

component of the imagination. Although it is usually granted that the visual

picture of two parallels on the blackboard is not different from the picture of

two lines, the prolongation of which would intersect in the sun, the visual

insight into the Euclidean axiom of the parallels is generally considered to be

very  compelling.  And  rightly  so:  in  spite  of  all  the  limitations  of

visualization, we can visualize the Euclidean axioms rather well. Consider,

for  instance,  the  axiom  that  the  straight  line  is  the  shortest  connectionbetween two points. It is intuitively certain that a straight line is shorter than

any line however slightly curved; this insight is due to the peculiarity of

human thinking that it can draw strict conclusions from vague visual pictures;

this is an important ability of the human mind which we put to continual use.

It is therefore impossible to disprove the existence of pure visualization on

the basis of a lack of clarity in visual pictures. On the contrary, this argument

has given a new impetus to the thesis of pure visualization, since it has been

interpreted in terms of a distinction between the vague perceptual space and

the precise space of visualization. The main objection to the theory of pure

visualization is our thesis that the non-Euclidean axioms can be visualized

just as rigorously if we adjust the definition of congruence. This thesis is

based on the discovery that the normative function of visualization is not of

visual but of logical origin and that the intuitive acceptance of certain axioms

is based on conditions from which they follow logically, and which have

previously been smuggled into the images. The axiom that the straight line is

the shortest distance is highly intuitive only because we have adapted the
                                                                        39
concept of straightness to the system of Euclidean concepts. It is therefore

necessary  merely  to  change  these  conditions  to  gain  a  correspondingly

intuitive  and  clear  insight  into  different  sets  of  axioms;  this  recognition

strikes at the root of the intuitive priority of Euclidean geometry. Our solution

of the problem is a denial of pure visualization, inasmuch as it denies to

visualization  a  special  extra-logical  compulsion  and  points  out  the  purely

logical and nonintuitive origin of the normative function. Since it asserts,

however, the possibility of a visual representation of all geometries, it could

be understood as an extension of pure visualization to all geometries. In that

case the predicate “pure” is but an empty addition, since it denotes only the

difference between experienced and imagined pictures, and we shall therefore

discard the term “pure visualization.” Instead we shall speak of the normative

function of the thinking process, which can guide the pictorial elements of

thinking into any logically permissible structure.


§ 14. GEOMETRY AS A THEORY OF RELATIONS

We  must  therefore  reject  the  arguments  for  the  priority  of  Euclidean

geometry within mathematics. The geometrical axioms are not asserted to be

true within mathematics, and mathematical geometry deals exclusively with

implications; it is a pure deductive system.We have based this assertion on our demonstration of the existence of

visual pictures for both kinds of geometry and we must now investigate the

extent  to  which  visual  pictures  are  actually  necessary  in  mathematical

geometry. The role they play in physical geometry is clear. They establish the

relation between thinking and reality; they connect perceptions with concepts

and therefore are involved in the important decision within physics which of

the conceivable geometries corresponds to reality. There is no analogue for

this  decision  in  mathematics,  because  here  no  problem  of  choice  among
                    40
geometries exists. What purpose do visual pictures serve?

To answer this question we must follow the theory of implicit definitions
                                                                        41
which was developed in connection with Hilbert’s axioms. According to

this theory there is no need for visual pictures in mathematical geometry, and

the mathematical meaning of geometrical structures and laws is exhausted by

purely conceptual relations. The geometrical elements point, plane, line, etc.,

have no meaning other than that which is determined by their properties as

formulated  in  the  axioms.  In  mathematics,  there  is  no  additional  visual

significance.

We must say, for example: a point is something which can never lie on two

different  nonintersecting  straight  lines  at  the  same  time  and  which

furthermore has the order property that between any two such things there is

always at least a third, etc. In short, it satisfies all the conditions expressed in

the axiomatic system. It is impossible, of course, to express this definition

explicitly so that the defined concept of point no longer occurs on the right-

hand side. We must speak therefore of an implicit definition. Let us consider

an example from the realm of equations. The equation




                                                                2
                                                              y = x+2y




can be solved for y, in which casey=1tyitzx
where y does not occur on the right-hand side. In contrast, the equation




                                                                x = sin y




is implicit for y, i.e., it cannot be solved for y. Sometimes it is written in the

apparently solved form




                                                            y = arc sin x,




but the meaning of the function arc sin is defined only by the previously

given implicit equation. It is therefore merely a restatement and not a solution

by means of independently defined functions. This kind of empty restatement

in an explicit form is possible also for implicit definitions. It appears already

in the formulation: a point is something which has the properties determined
                                            42
by the axioms of Euclidean geometry.

But does not this process define only the “objects” of geometry—do not

the connecting relations between, lies on, etc., retain their visual significance?

If this objection were justified, little would have been gained by the implicit

definition of the basic elements. However, the relations too can be defined in

this fashion. We can say: the relation between is the three-place relation b

which applies to three points on a straight line and whose properties are to be

determined.  Thus  the  content  of  the  different  relations  too  is  implicitly

defined. This is not a circular procedure. What remains as undefinable basic

concepts are such purely logical concepts as element, relation, one-to-one

correspondence, implication, and, etc. All geometrical concepts, the elements

as well as the relations, can be given as functions of these basic concepts.

This situation would appear more clearly if the axioms were not expressed
                                                43
in words but in logical symbols. Hilbert  has chosen words for the sake of

greater lucidity because we find it difficult to understand the meaning of the

basic  concepts  of  geometry  without  visual  pictures.  His  formulations,however,  have  been  carried  through  so  rigorously  that  a  translation  into

logical symbols would be easy. This rigor constitutes the great significance of

Hilbert’s axiomatic system, which distinguishes it from the work of all of his

predecessors.  Especially  the  axiomatic  system  of  Euclid  is  in  this  respect

quite insufficient: he did not succeed in a complete conceptualization of the

representing  visual  elements.  To  illustrate  the  purely  logical  meaning  of

Hilbert’s axioms and to give an example of the symbolism of mathematical

logic at the same time, we cite the three “between axioms” of Hilbert in this

kind of language. The axioms that define the concept between are stated as
        2
follows: 

 

II, 1. If A, B, and C are points on a straight line, and B lies between A and C,

then B lies also between C and A.

II, 2. If A and C are two points on a straight line, there exists at least one

point B which lies between A and C and at least one point D such that C

lies between A and D.

II, 3. Among any three points which lie on a straight line there exists exactly

one which lies between the other two.

                                                              44
For our translation we need the following symbols: 



  Logical symbols    Geometrical symbols  

      and (conjunction)    p(x)    x is a point  

  V    or (disjunction)    s(x)    x is a straight line  

  ⊃    implies (has the  1(x,  x lies on y (the relation lies on  )

      consequence)  y)  

  (x)    for all x . . .    b(x, y,  x lies between y and z (the

                                      z)  relation between  )
  3x    there is at least one x

      such that . . .  

  p    it is not the case that p  



The three axioms now read:IL 1. (x)(y)(2}p(x)-P(y)-P(2) - Gw)(s(w) 1(x, w) 1y, w).1(z, w)]
-b(y, x, 2)D b(y, z, X)}

L, 2. (x)(2)p() - ple)- (x£2)- (BW)is(w). 1(x, w). 1z, w)]
> @)p)-bly, x, 2] G[p(Y).- bz, x, v}

1L 3. () @{PX)-p(y)-p(2)- AW)s(W).1x, w).1(y, w).1(z, w)]
Dby, x, 2)V b(x, y, 2)V b(z, x, )]

[Ibly, %, 2)-b(x, v, 2)]
-[b(y, x,2).b(z x, )]
.[b(x, y, z).b(z, x, y)]}
  These sentences should be understood as follows: Only the logical symbols

have  an  independent  meaning;  the  geometrical  symbols  have  a  derived

meaning—they denote elements and relations such as to satisfy the axioms,

whose meanings are determined by the logical symbols alone.

We can easily show that the axioms entail a restriction such that only a

certain number of the visual relations of geometry satisfy the axioms. Fig. 14

gives us the picture of three points on a straight line.







                          Fig. 14. The relation between.



Which of them lies between the other two? If we suppose that it is z, we have

identified b with the visual relation ordinarily called “lies outside.” Axioms

II, 1 and II, 2 are compatible with this supposition, but not II, 3, since our

assumption would give us:

  (x)(y)(z){p(x).p(y).p(z).(∃w)[s(w).1(x, w).1(y, w).1(z, w)]

                                                              ⊃ [b(x, y, z).b(z,x, y)]}

This expression contradicts the symbolic expression of II, 3 given above,

according to which only one of the expressions on the right of the horseshoe

is permissible. The system defined by the three axioms therefore excludes oursupposition. The same, of course, applies to the supposition that x lies in the

middle. Our only choice is to consider y as lying in the middle. Only the

visual relation between and not the visual relation lies outside satisfies the

relation b which was defined exclusively by logical symbols.

  Have we herewith determined the visual relations uniquely, i.e., defined

them  completely?  By  no  means,  since  we  know  that  other  elements  and

relations satisfy the system of the Euclidean axioms as well. There are, of

course,  certain  restrictions  on  the  identification  of  the  basic  geometrical

concepts with visual relations, but there always remains an arbitrary factor.

The  visual  elements  cannot  be  exhaustively  defined  by  the  basic  logical

concepts alone.

Let us recall the number system. If we understand by a “point” a triplet of

numbers,  i.e.,  an  ordered  combination  of  three  real  numbers,  and  by  a

“straight  line”  a  linear  equation,  etc....,  the  system  of  these  “things”  also

satisfies the Euclidean axioms. This fact is the basis for the possibility of

analytical geometry. We have been so conditioned to this way of thinking

that  the  visual  difference  between  the  terms  “straight  line”  and  “linear

equation” is often ignored in the same text and they are used interchangeably.

This  situation  results  from  the  fact  that  the  properties  of  these  concepts

determined by the Euclidean axioms are the most important and the most

frequently  used.  In  other  connections,  however,  the  difference  becomes

obvious. A taut string can be identified with the visual picture of a straight

line, not with that of a linear equation. The latter is coordinated to it, but is

not visually equivalent.

  Another example of elements that satisfy the Euclidean axioms is a set of

elements which themselves belong to Euclidean geometry but which have an

entirely different meaning from that of the words “point”, “straight line”, etc.

Consider  the  well-known  duality  in  projective  geometry  whereby  the

elements  point  and  line  can  be  interchanged.  These  elements  have  quite

different visual structures but identically the same properties in projective

geometry. A system that satisfies all the Euclidean axioms is formed by the

so-called family of spheres. Imagine a fixed point P in space through which

pass spheres and circles, such that P lies on the surface of the spheres and the

circumference of the circles. Let us coordinate the following concepts:                                              a point: any point in space except P 

                                              a straight line: a circle through P 

                                              a plane: a spherical surface through P




  while  the  other  geometrical  concepts  retain  their  original  visual

significance relative to the new elements. For instance in the relation between

two points the “between” now means along a circle and not along a straight

line. This new system of elements satisfies all the Euclidean axioms without
                                              45
exception.  This  can  easily  be  proved.  The  axiomatic  system,  therefore,

cannot exhaust the visual content of its elements and its relations. It cannot

even uniquely determine a set of geometrical elements among the Euclidean

entities.

  Does this fact prove that mathematics cannot replace its visual components

by logic? This interpretation would be erroneous. Mathematics does not deal

with visual points and straight lines but only with the logical structures as

defined  by  the  axiomatic  system.  It  is  not  the  task  of  mathematics  to

coordinate  visual  pictures  to  these  concepts;  this  task  would  lead  from

mathematics to physics.

If we say that mathematics can define its elements by means of implicit

definitions, some qualification is required. R. Carnap directed my attention to

this fact. Whether something is a point is not determined by its nature alone

but depends on the other things to which it is to be related. One must always

begin with a multitude of things and state which are to be points, straight

lines, etc. Only then can one decide whether these things in their totality

correspond to the coordinated concepts. Carnap calls such concepts as point,

straight line, etc., which are given by implicit definitions, improper concepts.

Their peculiarity rests on the fact that they do not characterize a thing by its

properties  but  by  its  relation  to  other  things.  Consider  for  example  the

concept of the last car of a train. Whether or not a particular car falls under

this description does not depend on its properties but on its position relative

to other cars. We could therefore speak of relative concepts, but would have

to extend the meaning of this term to apply not only to relations but also to

the elements of relations. See Carnap, Symposium I, 1927, p. 355.

 Why  should  mathematics  use  visual  pictures?  For  the  content  of  its

assertions and for its logical conclusions it needs only the logical properties

of these elements. The precision of mathematical reasoning lies specifically

in the fact that it utilizes only the logically formulated properties of the visual

structures. Visual structures are nothing but an aid to thinking and belong to

the psychological apparatus which draws the conclusions, not to the content

of the thoughts themselves. Thinking does not aim at the pictures but at the

logical structure which they express. The psychological significance of an

example rests on the fact that logical operations are facilitated when we think

of concrete objects. If we write one of the logical arguments in its scholastic
      46
form: 








MEP
S4AM

 
it is very difficult to supply the correct conclusion, which in this case is E.

(This  is  the  so-called  form Celarent.)  However,  if  we  now  formulate  a

concrete example









No mammals have gills
All dogs are mammals

 

 
the conclusion “No dog has gills” follows without effort. In this example

therefore we perform nothing but a logical operation, whose logical structure

is given in symbolic form, but whose manipulation is considerably facilitated

by  the  logically  inessential  terms  “mammals”,  “gills”,  etc.  Similarly,  it  is

easier  for  the  mathematician  to  reach  conclusions  from  the  axioms  if  he

imagines them realized by physical objects. His visual geometrical figures

actually lead him into physics, not for physical purposes, however, but for the

sake of the logical structure that is illustrated by the physical objects. This

procedure does not make him a physicist any more than our performance of

the inference Celarent makes us zoologists.As  a  crude  example  let  us  consider  the  customary  presentation  of  the

vector calculus, which is usually developed as the physics of hydrodynamics.

The purely mathematical concept of the divergence is introduced as source,

and the gradient, in some cases, as velocity. While the mathematician is well

aware in this case that he is using physics as a means of visualization, he

forgets it in the usual visual representation of the geometrical axioms. Here,

too, he is concerned with physics, namely the physics of rigid bodies and

light  rays. “  Pure  visualization”  means  supplying  the  structure  of

mathematical relations with physical content analogous to supplying content

to  the  vector  calculus  in  terms  of  hydrodynamics.  In  several  branches  of

geometry this procedure becomes evident. Let us recall the “construction of

geometry  under  the  presupposition  of  motions”  as  it  was  presented  by
      47
Klein. He speaks there about the translations of the space, considers all

points shifted so that they coincide with certain other points, and formulates

the properties of this shift by means of axioms. One of these axioms states

that two translations can be interchanged (Fig. 15). We can move point A first

sideways  to A′  and  then  up,  or  we  can  move  it  first  up  to A"  and  then

sideways. In either case we arrive at the same point B. It is obvious that

dealing  with  the  concept  of  motion  does  not  represent  a  mathematical

operation; a mathematical point cannot be moved, it can only be coordinated

to another point. In the logical language of mathematics we should speak of a

coordinative operation O which coordinates to the point A first a point A′ and

then coordinates to A′ a point B. The coordinative operation between A and B

is the relative product OO, and the axiom which we are considering states
                            12
                                                                                  48
that  the  relative  product OO  equals  the  relative  product OO.  This
                                  1221

product therefore satisfies the commutative law. In symbols, we have




                                              OO = OO or AOO . . . = AOO
                                                  12211221

                                                                    ...




This is the logical significance of our assertion. If it is formulated in the

language of motion, and one speaks of shifting point A to point B, the logical

framework  is  translated  into  visual  pictures  derived  from  the  behavior  ofphysical bodies moved along rigid rails. Such a translation does not change

the mathematical relationships, nor does it give a different content to the

mathematical assertion, but makes it more vivid and easier to understand.

Although  we  must  grant  to  the  mathematician  the  right  to  use  such

visualizations for the purpose of facilitating his thought processes, we cannot

admit that it has any mathematical significance whatsoever.











A"

o
              Fig. 15. The interchangeability of two translations.



The same arguments hold for the visualization of congruence by means of

the superposition of line-segments. The logical significance of this motion of

superposition  is  again  a  coordination  of  stationary  line-segments.  The

visualization by means of transportation is derived from the experience with

rigid bodies. We merely give some physical content to the logical framework.

The concept of motion has no more significance here than had the zoological

concept animal in the foregoing example of a logical inference.

We must therefore maintain that mathematical geometry is not a science of

space insofar as we understand by space a visual structure that can be filled

with objects—it is a pure theory of manifolds. In it, visualization plays the

same  role  it  does  in  arithmetic  or  in  analysis;  and,  like  the  latter,  it  is

reducible  to  basic  logical  concepts,  namely  the  concepts  of  coordination,

classes, etc., which constitute the actual content of geometrical assertions.

The geometrical axioms are completely formulated as mathematical laws by

formulae like those given on page 95. The visual elements of space are an

unnecessary addition. Therefore the question of the truth of an axiom does

not arise in mathematical geometry. Axioms are arbitrarily fixed relations, the

content  of  which  can  be  expressed  by  certain  combinations  of  logical

concepts  alone,  and  which  can  be  replaced  just  as  well  by  any  otherconsistent combination of basic concepts.

If we wish to express our ideas in terms of the concepts synthetic and

analytic, we would have to point out that these concepts are applicable only

to  sentences  that  can  be  either  true  or  false,  and  not  to  definitions.  The

mathematical  axioms  are  therefore  neither  synthetic  nor  analytic,  but

definitions.  This  statement  might  be  construed  as  a  contradiction  of  our

assertion that the visual compulsion of the geometrical axioms is logical in

nature, because this assertion seems to indicate that the axioms are analytic.

The seeming contradiction is resolved as follows: if a is a geometrical axiom,

then points, straight lines, and other concepts which it may contain have no

independent meaning. They obtain their meaning from a only in connection

with the other axioms. We could consider the concepts point, straight line,

etc., to be defined by the axiomatic system and to be reintroduced into axiom

a. This procedure, however, would give us a new axiom which we might

designate by a′; a′ is analytic and true, whereas a is a definition and neither

true nor false. Pure visualization gives us axiom a′; the geometrical axioms

themselves are of the type a.

  Hence the question whether axioms are a priori becomes pointless since

they are arbitrary.

  Strangely enough, F. Klein, who has made outstanding contributions to the

development  of  non-Euclidean  geometry,  does  not  regard  the  axioms  as

arbitrary.  He  calls  them  “not  arbitrary,  but  reasonable  statements  which

generally are evoked by spatial visualization and whose individual content is

regulated on the basis of convenience” (op. cit., p. 202). Nevertheless, the

axioms of non-Euclidean geometry likewise are supposed to belong to these

reasonable  statements,  since  visualization  can  require  the  axiom  of  the

parallels only within certain limits of accuracy (op. cit., pp. 191 and 201).

This point of view is untenable, since non-Euclidean geometry would become

“unreasonable”  beyond  a  certain  degree  of  curvature.  Klein’s  comments

should be understood as a hint to mathematicians to think visually, rather

than as an epistemologically conceived argument.

  Only one system of axioms within mathematics retains its claims to truth,

namely the axioms of logic itself. This system seems to be irreducible. An

investigation of this question would lead far beyond the scope of this book,

which deals with the problems of space and time. We can thus treat only the

geometrical aspects of mathematics and shall be satisfied in having shownthat there is no problem of the truth of geometrical axioms and that no special

geometrical visualization exists in mathematics.

 

We  have  restricted  ourselves  in  our  formulation  of  the  problem  to

geometrical visualization in order to avoid the discussions that have recently

arisen in connection with mathematical intuitionism. Even though it is not

possible to eliminate the visual element in mathematics altogether, there does

not exist a special kind of geometrical visualization. It may be that intuitive

visual processes enter into every instance of logical thinking and appear thus

in all branches of mathematics in equal fashion. This question deals with the

epistemology of logic and the relation between logic and mathematics, not

with the specific problem of geometry and geometrical visualization. Above

all,  the  results  of  such  an  investigation  can  never  establish  a  difference

between Euclidean and non-Euclidean geometry. There can be no doubt that

the  two  systems  occupy  parallel  positions  in  mathematics.  When  Hilbert

(Math. Ann. 95, pp. 170—171) in his emphasis on the visual character of

practical  logical  reasoning,  believes  that  he  confirms  Kant’s  theory  of

visualization, he appears overly tolerant in his interpretation of an historical

philosophical system. Kant’s theory of the visualization of mathematics was

based on the visual character of the synthetic axioms and was not concerned

with the visual compulsion of analytic judgments. Hilbert’s further remarks

regarding the existence of extra-logical objects and the possibility of their

visualization are relevant only to visualization in general. See also p. 107.


§ 15. WHAT IS A GRAPHICAL REPRESENTATION

The analysis of geometry as a theory of relations will become quite explicit

if we use it to clarify a problem seldom recognized in its full scope. This is

the problem of graphical representation.  Graphical representations are widely used. Every physical or technical text

is filled with drawings of curves which enable us to understand the most

complicated phenomena. The engineer cannot design his steam engines and

motors,  his  bridges  and  electric  circuits,  without  the  use  of  diagrams;  he

needs these diagrams to calculate the efficiency of machines, to represent the

strength  of  materials,  and  to  obtain  the  stability  of  the  vibratory  state  of

motors and radio transmitters from the intersection of two straight lines on

the diagram. These figures, whose dimensions he measures on graph paper

and  whose  area  he  calculates  with  a  planimeter,  are  aids  not  only  to  his

understanding but also to his calculations. The physicist represents laws of

nature  graphically  on  the  one  hand  by  translating  certain  mathematical

functions  into  curves  and  planes  according  to  the  rules  of  analytical

geometry, on the other hand by plotting his measurements on graph paper and

by connecting the points through curves in order to discover the represented

functions. What the physicist represents as coordinates on graph paper is by

no  means  only  distances  and  spatial  magnitudes.  They  can  be  pressures,

temperatures, electric voltages, in short any measurable magnitude found in

physics. This is all so well known that it need not be emphasized any further.

Everybody has at one time or another welcomed the clarifying effect of a

graphical representation while attempting to understand a physical problem.

We  must  ask  the  question,  however,  how  it  is  possible  that  things  so

different as the gas law, the path of an electric discharge, etc., can all be

represented  by  spatial  diagrams.  What  do  they  have  in  common?  Why,

indeed, do such diagrams lead to an easier understanding? This fact is really

quite strange. Would not the operator of a steam engine do a better job if he

were thinking visually about the current of steam and the growing of the

pressure as such? He could visualize them directly since he is able to perceive

current and pressure. But does he use this kind of visualization? No, he looks

at the manometer which provides a graphical representation of the pressure,

and he estimates the amount of coal to be added by the amount which a

pointer on a scale is short of the prescribed level.

If we were able to look into the minds of all these mechanics, electricians,

and engineers, as we are able to look at a moving picture, we would find no

images of pressures, voltages and lights, but invariably the sketch of a black

curve on graph paper. Just think of a physicist in front of an electric switch;

why  does  he  turn  the  handle  or  move  the  wire  into  a  certain  position?Because his inner eye sees curves that increase, intersect, or decrease, and

points traveling along a curve directed by means of switches. By far the most

frequent visualizations of physical happenings are representations in terms of

spatial relations that completely replace direct pictures. How is this possible?

The solution to this problem is contained in our conception of geometry as

a theory of relations. The control of natural phenomena is achieved by means

of mathematical concepts. These concepts are defined by implicit definitions

and  are  not  dependent  on  a  unique  and  specific  kind  of  visualization.

Whatever visual objects we wish to coordinate to them is left to our choice.

They may be pressures and currents as well as rigid measuring rods. This

process of coordination is equivalent to a coordinative definition. There exists

a coordinative definition not only for straight lines and rigid measuring rods,

but also for straight lines and direct currents, or increases in the tension of a

stretched rod. The coordination is arbitrary not only relative to certain kinds

of things but also to the total domain of objects. The geometrical axioms can

therefore be realized by means of compressed gases, electrical phenomena or

mechanical forces as well as through rigid bodies and light rays. All these

areas have a logical structure of such a kind that they can be coordinated to

mathematical geometry; therefore they can also be coordinated to physical

geometry and represented by means of diagrams.

Is a graphical representation actually a coordination to physical geometry?

Do  we  coordinate  here  anything  but ideal  structures?  We  do  indeed

coordinate physical things, but it is somewhat difficult to notice this fact. We

are  so  accustomed  to  the  coordination  of  rigid  bodies  to  mathematical

geometry as a theory of relations that we no longer notice that there exists a

duality.  Nevertheless  it  is  a  coordination.  On  the  one  hand  we  have  the

mathematical system A of relations and on the other hand the physical system

a of rigid bodies. Every assertion about A can be translated into an assertion

about a,  and  it  is  customary  to  use  assertions  about a  alone  which  are

symbolic of assertions about A. This is called visual geometry. The system a

is the visual space of A. In contrast, the content of A cannot be visualized and

may  be  expressed  by  formulae  like  those  given  on  page  95.  This

consideration also clarifies the term pure visualization. We do not think of

the system a as a system of natural objects, but of objects exemplifying the

relations of Euclidean geometry; then the system a of things is a space of

pure visualization. Of course, we are not tied to a Euclidean geometry A butcould choose a non-Euclidean geometry A′ just as well. If we think of ideal

objects a′ which look like rigid bodies but satisfy the laws of A′, then a′ is the

space of pure visualization of non-Euclidean geometry. The system a is a

space either of pure or of empirical visualization, depending on whether we

just invent the objects in a or find them in nature.

  The so-called visual geometry is thus already a graphical representation, a

mapping of the relational structure A upon the system a of real objects. It is

therefore  possible  to  represent  even  purely  logical  structures  in  graphical

form. The representation of the inference of the scholastic schema (page 98)

is the graphical representation of a logical inference. The logical relation of

major premise, minor premise and conclusion is represented graphically by

the spatial arrangement of the three lines. Another example of this type is the

graphical representation of complex numbers, which were originally defined

in purely logical terms, by means of points on a plane. This example shows

how  the  systems A  and a  are  merged  in  customary  linguistic  usage.

Mathematics concerns itself with the coordination of the complex numbers to

a  system A,  i.e.,  to  a  plane  defined  by  the  geometrical  elements  in  the

formulae on p. 95. Instead, one usually speaks of a coordination to the plane

of a drawing, i.e., to the corresponding elements of a. Both terms are used

interchangeably;  thus  we  have  the  advantage  of  being  able  to  think  in

pictures, since only the system a can be visualized, not the system A.

We can now understand why graphical representations are possible. The

system of relations A can be coordinated not only to the physical system a,

but to a large number of different physical systems b, c . . . , for instance to

the system of thermodynamics, to that of electrical phenomena, etc. Let us

take  as  an  illustration  the P-T  diagram  of  a  gas  of  fixed  quantity.  The
                                                                                1
coordination for some of its elements is given in the following table: 



  1. point    = the state of a gas at constant pressure and

                                    temperature.  

  2. straight line through the  = change of state at constant volume.  

origin  

  3. straight line parallel to the  = change of state at constant pressure.  

T   axis

  4. straight line parallel to the  = change of state at constant temperature.  P   axis



      1
 The following expressions are justified by the gas law PV = RT.



  5. any  = change of state where the volume V is related to the

straight line  temperature by the function    

                                                  49

  6. two  = two changes of state as given in 5 with the same α and

paralleldifferent β.  

straight lines  

  7. two  = two changes of state as given in 5 for which the

equally longexpression    depending on the initial

V(Po—P1)2+(Te—

 
line
                and final states, has the same value.
segments  



On the basis of this coordination, the system b of the states of a gas is as good

a realization of the system of relations A as the system of rigid bodies.

  What do we do, however, if we are not satisfied with our table, but actually

draw  a  diagram?  We  then  carry  out  another  coordination,  namely  that

between a and b. We no longer speak of A, but of a. We say that in a change

of state according to 5, the gas moves along a straight line, and we now

understand by “straight line ” a drawn figure and no longer a change of state.

The straight line in the drawing is itself an object of a which we coordinate to

the change of state. The connection between A and a is so close, that in order

to  understand  the  coordination  between A  and b,  we  establish  the

coordination between a and b. Of course, this is not logically necessary. We

can omit a and treat b directly as a visualization of A. If we do this, however,

we may no longer think of diagrams but must endow the objects in b with the

qualities given in perception. We may think for instance of the sensation of

pressure  and  temperature,  any  combination  of  both  of  which  is  a

representation of a point. If we think of both as uniformly increasing, then the

sensation which we have is the image of a straight line. The system b of

states of the gas is as much a realization of A as the system a of rigid bodiesand it is also a realization in terms of perceptions if we actually think of the

states of a gas and do not smuggle in diagrams. There is not just one, but

there are many different physical geometries. The geometry of rigid bodies is

generally preferred for practical reasons, but it is by no means the only one

that can be visualized. We are so accustomed to the preferred position of rigid

bodies that we acknowledge as space only the system represented by them. In

principle,  one  could  just  as  well  call  the  manifold b  of  states  of  a  gas  a

physical space. The “physical space” is generally reserved, however, for the

system a of rigid bodies.

 

  These practical considerations are naturally by far the most important ones

and we shall therefore understand by physical geometry the system a of rigid

bodies and light rays. This preference is caused not only by habit but is also

based  on  the  physical  properties  of  the  objects  in a.  They  can  easily  be

produced as geometrical tools such as rulers and triangles, easily be kept

constant, and above all, readily be compared with other physical phenomena.

These are the reasons why the objects in a have become the preferred tools of

measurement and why we have grown accustomed to determine all physical

states by comparison with rigid measuring rods. We measure temperature via

a column of mercury finally on a rigid scale, an electric voltage by the length

of a circular strip of paper, the scale of the voltmeter, etc. This preference,

however, is not due to logical necessity. We could just as well measure the

length of rigid rods by means of voltages if we were to substitute a standard

dry  cell  for  the  standard  meter  kept  in  Paris.  The  reduction  of  all

measurements  to  rigid  measuring  rods  is  based  purely  on  pragmatic

considerations.  At  various  times  attempts  have  been  made  to  show  the

epistemological  necessity  of  reducing  all  measurements  to  those  of  space

(and  time).  This  restriction  is  not  admissible.  The  reduction  is  merely

generally expedient because of the practical advantages of rigid measuring

rods.

 

Now we understand the meaning of graphical representations. They signify

nothing but a coordination of the system a to the systems b, c, . . . of other

physical  objects,  which  is  possible  only  because  all  these  systems  are

realizations  of  the  same  conceptual  system A.  That  we  call  a  graphical

representation a visualization is epistemologically speaking not correct, sincethe systems b, c, ... can be visualized just as well as a. Due to practical

considerations,  however,  we  have  grown  accustomed  to  express  the

conceptual relations of A mostly by a, not thinking of them abstractly but

always as represented by visual pictures of a. It is a simplification if we

represent other physical systems in terms of the preferred system a. Indeed,

even the operator of a machine thinks more readily in terms of diagrams than

in terms of the physical processes which he controls by the levers in his hand.

We  should  like  to  express  at  this  point  the  conjecture  that  the

representation of geometrical relations by systems of objects is more than a

matter  of  convenience  and  that  it  rests  on  a  basic  necessity  of  human

thinking. It is quite impossible to think abstractly about relations. We cannot

understand  them  without  some  method  of  symbolic  representation  which

supplies a concrete model of the abstract relations. The choice of system a is

of course only one out of many possible selections. Even if we use the purely

logical relations given by the formulae on p. 94, we are employing a concrete

model when we think of the written letters, which are again nothing but a

graphical  representation  of  the  system  of  relations.  Thinking  completely

without symbols seems to be impossible. However, this fact should not lead

to the mistaken impression that the chosen symbol is essential for the content

of the thought. It is as irrelevant as is the color of the beads of an abacus for

the arithmetical operations they represent. By content in the logical sense is

meant  only  the  system  of  relations  common  to  a  given  set  of  symbolic

systems. The fact that we can think of a system of relations only in terms of

concrete  objects  does  not  change  its  independent  and  purely  logical

significance.CHAPTER II. TIME









§ 16. THE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN SPACE AND TIME

  Philosophy of science has examined the problems of time much less than

the problems of space. Time has generally been considered as an ordering

schema similar to, but simpler than, that of space, simpler because it has only

one  dimension.  Some  philosophers  have  believed  that  a  philosophical

clarification of space also provided a solution of the problem of time. Kant

presented  space  and  time  as  analogous  forms  of  visualization  and  treated

them in a common chapter in his major epistemological work. Time therefore

seems  to  be  much  less  problematic  since  it  has  none  of  the  difficulties

resulting  from  multi-dimensionality.  Time  does  not  have  the  problem  of

mirror—image congruence, i.e., the problem of the existence of equal and

similarly shaped figures that cannot be superimposed, a problem which has

played some role in Kant’s philosophy. Furthermore, time has no problem

analogous  to  non-Euclidean  geometry.  In  a  one-dimensional  schema  it  is

impossible to distinguish between straightness and curvature. A curved line

can  always  be  “straightened  out”  without  a  deformation  of  its  smallest

elements. It is therefore impossible to determine by internal measurements

whether a one-dimensional continuum is straight or curved. A line can have

an external curvature but never an internal one, since this possibility exists

only for a two-dimensional or higher continuum. Thus time lacks, because of

its one-dimensionality, all those problems which have led to the philosophical

analysis of the problems of space.

The treatment of the problem of time as parallel to that of space has beendetrimental. One was aware only of those problems which do not exist for

time, rather than of its special features. These features manifest themselves in

the fact that time order is possible in a realm which has no spatial order,

namely the world of the psychic experiences of an individual human being.

This is the reason why the experience of time is allotted a primary position

among  conscious  experiences,  and  is  felt  as  more  immediate  than  the

experience of space. There is indeed no experience of space in the direct

sense in which we feel the flow of time during our life. The experience of

time appears to be closely connected with the experience of the ego. “I am” is

always equivalent to “I am now,” but I am in an “eternal now” and feel

myself remaining the same in the elusive current of time.

At  the  moment,  however,  we  cannot  go  into  this  question.  Before  we

attempt a solution of these intricate problems, it is necessary to consider the

order of time as a problem of natural science, similar to that of the order of

space. An analysis of natural science is the only path to the central problems

of  epistemology.  We  must  therefore  first  examine  those  problems  which

result from the parallelism of spatial order and time order and show that the

changes in the philosophical analysis of geometry have also consequences for

the order of time. First, the problem of congruence exists for time intervals as

well as for spatial distances. The parallelism becomes even closer, if space

and  time  are  combined  into  a  four-dimensional  manifold  where  all  the

epistemological  problems  appear  in  the  same  fashion  in  which  we  have

encountered them in the three-dimensional manifold of space.

  Whereas the conception of space and time as a four-dimensional manifold

has  been  very  fruitful  for  mathematical  physics,  its  effect  in  the  field  of

epistemology  has  been  only  to  confuse  the  issue.  Calling  time  the  fourth

dimension gives it an air of mystery. One might think that time can now be

conceived  as  a  kind  of  space  and  try  in  vain  to  add  visually  a  fourth

dimension to the three dimensions of space. It is essential to guard against

such a misunderstanding of mathematical concepts. If we add time to space

as a fourth dimension, it does not lose in any way its peculiar character as

time. Through the combination of space and time into a four-dimensional

manifold we merely express the fact that it takes four numbers to determine a

world event, namely three numbers for the spatial location and one for time.

Such an ordering of elements, each of which is given by four conditions

(coordinates) can always be conceived mathematically as a four-dimensionalmanifold. The same is of course possible in many other cases. Musical tones

can be ordered according to volume and pitch, and are thus brought into a

two-dimensional manifold. Similarly, colors can be determined by the three

basic colors, red, green, and blue, if we state for any given color how much it

contains  of  each  of  these  three  components.  Such  an  ordering  does  not

change  either  tones  or  colors;  it  is  merely  a  mathematical  expression  of

something  that  we  have  known  and  visualized  for  a  long  time.  Our

schematization of time as a fourth dimension therefore does not imply any

changes in the conception of time.

The practical value of this form of mathematical expression lies in the fact

that  we  can  occasionally  visualize  the  manifold  with  the  aid  of  spatial

concepts, i.e., that we can represent them graphically. We can thus symbolize

the manifold of tones by means of a plane. If we express the volume of the

tone on a horizontal axis and its pitch on a vertical axis, then every point of

the plane (more correctly, the quadrant, since volume and pitch cannot be

negative)  corresponds  to  a  tone  of  specific  volume  and  pitch.  Such  a

representation of tones on a plane is for many purposes very practical, but it

is by no means necessary. Even if we understand by volume and pitch the

experience that we have in hearing the tone, the two-dimensional manifold

still exists; these experiences themselves form the manifold. Let us refer at

this  point  to  the  considerations  of  §  15  which  showed  that  a  multi-

dimensional  manifold  is  a  conceptual  structure  and  that  the  space  of

visualization  is  only  one  of  many  possible  forms  that  add  content  to  the

conceptual frame. We therefore need not call the representation of the tone

manifold by a plane the visual representation of the two-dimensional tone

manifold. The auditory realization of the tone experiences themselves would

also give perceptual content to the conceptual manifold. The same holds for

the  four-dimensional  space-time  manifold.  We could  conceive  it  as

represented by a four-dimensional space; in this case, however, imagination

fails us, since visualized space has only three dimensions. In this situation we

can avail ourselves of spatial representations of cross-sections of the four-

dimensional  manifold.  We  may  represent  a  dimension  of  space  on  a

horizontal axis, the dimension of time on a vertical axis, and obtain in the

plane of the resulting space a representation of the manifold of events which

occur on a line in space at various times. This method of visualizing the flow

of time by means of a diagram can be very useful. The theory of relativity,

however,  is  not  required  for  such  a  visualization,  since  graphicallyrepresented railroad schedules, for example, achieve the same effect.

Yet this device does not change our conception of time. We can always fill

the four-dimensional space-time manifold with the direct perceptual content

which we have connected with space and time in the past. In the way we

experience events as spatially and temporally determined, they already form a

four-dimensional manifold. We may therefore retain the perceptual difference

between  space  and  time  without  fear  of  contradicting  the  mathematical

representation. Just as the representation of tones on a plane cannot require us

to give up the intuitive representation of the volume or pitch of a tone, so the

combination of space and time into a four-dimensional manifold cannot offer

any grounds to discard the intuitive representations which we connect with

space and time and which differ considerably for them. On the contrary, it is

just in this form that the intuitive representation of all four dimensions is

possible without difficulty.

The properties of time which the theory of relativity has discovered have

nothing to do with its treatment as fourth dimension. This procedure was

already possible in classical physics, where it was frequently used. However,

according to the theory of relativity the four-dimensional manifold is of a

new type; it obeys laws different from those of classical theory. These results

were obtained when time was subjected to the same kind of analysis as was

applied  to  the  three-dimensional  space  manifold.  The  analysis  led  to  a

realization of the arbitrariness of coordinative definitions even for time, and

finally to some insights which appeared at first very strange. To demonstrate

these changes in the conception of time we need not employ mathematical

considerations. We can remain within the perceptual experience of time and

develop everything the theory of relativity teaches about time. Indeed, in an

epistemological  sense  we  shall  go  further.  On  the  other  hand,  we  shall

recognize the significance of the structure of the four-dimensional manifold

with the help of a mathematical formulation of our results, and thus deprive it

of its apparent mystery. We shall even find that the Minkowskian world is

incorrectly interpreted if one looks to it for support of the parallelism of space

and time; on the contrary, the world of Minkowski expresses the peculiarity

of the time dimension mathematically by prefixing a minus sign to the time

expression in the basic metrical formulae. The peculiarity of time appears

even in an analysis that does not consider the subjective experience of time.

We  shall  show  that  the  parallelism  does  not  exist  objectively  and  that  innatural  science  time  is  more  fundamental  than  space,  the  topological  and

metrical  relations  of  which  can  be  completely  reduced  to  observations  of

time. We shall finally recognize that time order represents the prototype of

causal  propagation  and  thus  discover  space-time  order  as  the  schema  of

causal connection.

In  this  chapter  we  shall  consider  only  physical  time.  We  shall  pay  no

attention to the psychological characteristics of the experience of time, but

shall analyze the physical order of time just as we gave an analysis of the

physical  order  of  space.  Such  a  distinction  is  certainly  possible;  we  can

examine what physics means by “time” just as we can examine what physics

means by “matter.” It has often been claimed that only the physical properties

of  time  can  be  revealed  in  such  an  investigation  and  that,  unaffected  by

physical  time,  the  psychological  experience  of  time  retains  its a  priori

character and obeys its own laws. This view which has been expressed by

various philosophical writers in connection with the theory of relativity, must

be  rejected  most  emphatically.  All  our  so-called a  priori  judgments  are

determined by primitive experiences, by the physics of everyday life, to a

much higher degree than we may think. Nothing would do more harm to the

progress of science than to interpret such experiences as apodictic necessities

and  thus  to  arrest  the  natural  growth  of  our  knowledge.  Actually,  such  a

conception would make the physics of everyday life the norm for scientific

physics  and  express  our  unwillingness  to  adjust  our  imagination  to  the

development of physics from a naive world picture to an exact science. We

shall therefore use the distinction between time as experience and physical

time only as a temporary aid which leads us to a deeper scientific insight into

the  concept  of  time;  we  shall  correct  the  intuitive  experience time

accordingly. Indeed, we shall find that it is just the relativistic concept of time

which  presents  the  experience  of  time  in  a  new  light.  This  analysis  will

clarify the meaning and content of everyday experiences; finally we shall

learn in this way, better than through a phenomenological analysis, what we

“actually mean” by the experience of time.


§ 17. THE UNIFORMITY OF TIME

The  solution  we  have  offered  for  the  problem  of  physical  geometry  is

based  on  the  idea  of  the  coordinative  definition.  The  first  coordinative

definition  referred  to  the  unit  of  length  and  the  second  to  congruence.Whether two distant line-segments are equal is not a matter of knowledge but

of definition;  and  this  definition  consists  ultimately  in  a  reference  to  a

physical object coordinated to the concept of a unit. We recognized the need

for  such  a  coordinative  definition  because  otherwise  the  problem  would

remain  undetermined.  It  is  not  a  technical  but  a  logical  impossibility  to

compare  distant  line-segments  without  a  prior  coordinative  definition  of

congruence. The definition of congruence by means of rigid bodies proved to

be most useful, since this definition was shown to be independent of the path

along which the rigid body is transported.

  Similar considerations must be carried through for the problem of time. It

is so obvious that we have to determine a unit of time, that we shall merely

mention  this  first  coordinative  definition.  But  for  time,  too,  there  is  a

comparison of length. Before we enter into an epistemological investigation,

let  us  first  examine  what  time  intervals  physics  considers  to  be  equal  in

length. The rotation of the earth is the most important example; we say that

the  time  intervals  which  the  earth  requires  for  one  complete  rotation  are

equal. For the subdivision of such time intervals we use a different method,

namely the measurement of angles. We accept time intervals as equal if they

correspond to equal angles of the earth’s rotation. Through the combination

of these two methods we obtain the measure of time, and the flow of time we

have thus obtained is called uniform. The problem of the congruence of time

intervals leads therefore to the problem of the uniformity of time.

The  described  time  measurement  employs  two  essentially  different

methods. If we consider the revolutions of the earth to have equal duration,

we  do  this  because  they  represent periods  of  the  same  type.  The  same

principle is involved if we say that the periods of a pendulum are equally

long.  The  counting  of  periods  is  the  first  and  most  natural  type  of  time

measurement. The second method consists in subdividing the diurnal period

by means of the angle of the earth’s rotation. In this case, equal times are

measured with the aid of equal spatial magnitudes. This reduction of time

measurements  to  space  measurements  is  also  present  in  inertial  motion.

According  to  the  law  of  inertia,  if  a  body  moves  freely,  unaffected  by

accelerating or retarding forces, it will cover equal distances in equal time

intervals. We can thus use its motion as a measure of uniformity and regard

as equal the times of transit through equal distances. Finally, the motion of

light permits an analogous method since light covers equal distances in equaltimes. There are therefore two basic kinds of time measurement: one consists

in counting periodic processes, and the other in measuring spatial distances

corresponding to certain non-periodic processes.

The opinion has been expressed that there are no actual time measurements

and that all time measurements must be reduced to spatial measurements.

This is not correct. The reduction applies only to the second type of time

measurement; the first method has nothing to do with spatial measurements.

If we count periodic events, as for instance the tick-tock of a watch, we are

using  a  genuine  time  scale.  We  hear  a  sequence  of  sounds  and  call  the

intermediate time intervals equal. That we call them equal is based on the fact

that each sound represents the end of a full period at which the swinging

pendulum has reached its previous position. How it moves within one of

these periods does not matter at all. It is well known that the motion of a

pendulum is far from uniform and yet we accept the intervals of the complete

periods as equal. The fact that a period is completed is recognized by the

return of the system to its original condition; there is no need of a spatial

measurement. This time measurement is thus based on the recurrence of the

same state. The watch is a good illustration of this procedure. The internal

works have in this case only the significance of a counting device, and the

angular path of the hands is merely a measure of the number of cogs which

the  gears  have  advanced  and  hence  also  a  measure  of  the  number  of

completed periods of the balance wheel. The time measure of the watch is

therefore  provided  by  the  balance  wheel;  the  hands  merely  indicate  the

number  of  units  of  measurement  and  save  us  the  trouble  of  counting.

Actually, we can only measure an integral number of time intervals by this

method. If the unit is chosen small enough, however, the resulting inaccuracy

can be made very small.

In  special  cases  the  individual  period  is  run  through  uniformly  as,  for

instance,  in  the  case  of  the  rotating  earth.  We  arrive  at  a  subdivision

according to the second method by measuring the angular path of the earth’s

rotation  relative  to  the  fixed  stars.  This  subdivision  of  the  time  measure

involves  genuine  spatial  measurements,  namely,  of  angular  distances,  and

differs therefore from the merely apparent use of angular measurements in

the case of the watch.

To summarize our ideas, we may say that the measurement of equal time

intervals is obtained through mechanisms which we assume to run throughtheir periods in equal times. Actually we never measure a “pure time,” but

always a process,  which  may  be  periodic  as  in  the  case  of  the  clock,  or

nonperiodic as in the case of the freely moving mass point. Every lapse of

time is connected with some process, for otherwise it could not be perceived

at all. The measurement of time is therefore based upon an assumption about

the behavior of certain physical mechanisms.

How can we test this assumption? There is only one answer: we cannot test

it at all. There is basically no means to compare two successive periods of a

clock, just as there is no means to compare two measuring rods when one lies

behind the other. We cannot carry back the later time interval and place it

next  to  the  earlier  one.  It  is  possible  to  make  empirical  statements  about

clocks, but such statements would concern something else. Two clocks stand

next to each other, and we observe that the beginning as well as the end of

their periods coincide. Further observation may show that the ends of their

periods always coincide. This experience teaches us that two clocks standing

next to each other and having equal periods once will always have equal

periods.  But  this  is  all.  Whether  both  clocks  require  more  time  for  later

periods cannot be determined.

Why  is  this  determination  impossible?  Do  not  the  laws  of  physics,  for

instance  those  of  the  motion  of  a  pendulum,  compel  us  to  believe  in  the

equality of the periods? It is true that the laws as described in textbooks

suggest this belief; but if we ask ourselves where these laws come from, we

shall find that they are obtained through observations of clocks calibrated

according  to  the  principle  of  the  equality  of  their  periods.  The  proof  is

therefore circular. If we had used a different scale for our measurements, we

would have obtained different laws which in turn would have compelled us to

consider the latter scale as the correct one. Neither can the circularity be

removed by time measurements of nonperiodic processes. The law of inertia

does prescribe a measure of time, but this law could easily be restated for a

different type of time measurement in which a freely moving body slows

down and a body which falls towards the earth moves at a uniform rate—this

restatement would never lead to internal contradictions.

A  solution  is  obtained  only  when  we  apply  our  previous  results  about

spatial congruence and introduce the concept of a coordinative definition into

the measure of time. The equality of successive time intervals is not a matter

of knowledge but a matter of definition. As for spatial congruence, a certainrule must be laid down before the comparison of magnitudes is defined. This

determination  can  again  be  made  only  by  reference  to  a  physical

phenomenon; a physical process, such as the rotation of the earth, is taken as

a measure of uniformity by definition. All definitions are equally admissible.

We could define the motion in the earth’s gravitational field as uniform and

would consequently obtain a retardation for a freely moving body. Physics,

however, has decided on a particular definition with special properties. It uses

three independent methods for the definition of the uniformity of time:

 

1. The definition by means of natural clocks.

2. The definition by means of the laws of mechanics. (It comprises not

    only  the  definition  by  means  of  inertial  motion,  but  also  those

    definitions which use the rotating earth or the pendulum.)

3. The definition using the motion of light (light clock).


We shall discuss 1 and 2 in the following section, 3 in § 27. However, we

can assert: it is an empirical fact that these three definitions lead to the same

measure of the flow of time. Since these definitions have this property, the

clock proves to be the natural measure of time in the same sense in which the

rigid measuring rod is the natural measure of space.

  Processes of nature thus determine a flow of time. It is, however, not an

epistemological necessity to use the clock as a definition of uniformity. In an

epistemological sense any other definition is equally admissible, provided

only that it leads to a univocal and noncontradictory description of nature.

For practical reasons one chooses the definition by means of clocks because

it  simplifies  the  description  of  nature  considerably.  This  simplicity  has

nothing to do with truth, since it is merely descriptive simplicity.

On the other hand, it is a statement of fact that a flow of time of this kind

exists; that therefore all periodic processes, and furthermore inertial motion

and the motion of light, lead to the same measure of time. This statement

should not be considered to be a priori but the result of experience. It could

be false, and later we shall learn about cases for which it is indeed not true.

Today we know that it applies strictly only in gravitational-free space and in

gravitational fields of particular simplicity (in stationary fields). Since strictly

speaking there are no such fields, our characterization of the uniform flow of

natural processes holds only approximately.This approximation fits terrestrial and astronomical relations to such a high

degree that the deviations lie far below the limits of exactness. There is good

reason, therefore, for astronomers to try to make uniform time independent of

the fluctuations of the earth’s motion resulting from its own rotation, axial

oscillations,  its  revolution  around  the  sun,  and  lunar  influences.  These

difficulties  show  that  the  coordinative  definition  of  uniformity  cannot  be

given so easily as it can be schematically conceived. There is no periodic

motion which is completely free from external influence and which returns to

exactly equal states. Even the earth’s rotation has these properties only to a

certain, though very high, degree of approximation. The precession of the

earth’s axis has the effect that the earth has a slightly different position after

each rotation and therefore does not reach exactly the same state. For this

reason uniform time is not considered to be equal to the directly observed

time, but is derived indirectly from it by a series of corrections. This method

is the same as that used in the measurement of length, where the unit of

length is given not directly by the transported measuring rod but is calculated

indirectly with the aid of correction factors for temperature, etc. It is obvious,

of course, that this method does not enable us to discover a “true” time, but

that astronomers simply determine with the aid of the laws of mechanics that

particular  flow  of  time  which  the  laws  of  physics  implicitly  define.  A

redefinition of uniformity through a change in the laws of physics would give

the astronomer a different time. His work is comparable to the investigation

of the physicist to determine the c.g.s. unit of electric current, if the ampere is

already defined by the electrolytic separation of a specific quantity of silver.

This is an exceedingly difficult task, which is of great importance, but it does

not teach us how large the unit of current should be.

We  can  schematize  the  definition  of  uniformity  given  by  the  laws  of

physics in the same way as we schematized the definition of the comparison

of  length.  For  this  purpose  we  introduced  in  §  6  the  distinction  between

universal and differential forces. Universal forces are those that affect all

substances equally, whereas differential forces affect them differently. We

shall use the same distinction in our definition of the clock, which we defined

above as a closed periodic system. However, the concept of a closed system

is not defined so long as universal forces are permitted. If we should regard

the period of the earth’s rotation as variable—for example (starting from an

arbitrary point) call the second rotation twice as long, the third three times as

long—then  this  definition  would  become  noticeable  in  the  equations  ofphysics  through  the  appearance  of  a  force  which  was  thus  introduced  by

definition.  This  force  would  have  the  “effect”  that  the  period  of  rotation

would constantly increase. We would find that this force retards all clocks in

equal fashion and that it retards the motion of all otherwise freely moving

bodies; it has all the properties of a universal force. We now set this force

equal to zero by definition, i.e., we define the closed system as free from

differential  forces,  but  neglect  universal  forces.  This  definition  therefore

determines the zero point from which forces are measured. Without such a

zero point the magnitude of a force would be left undetermined, since a force

is something which we regard as the cause of a change, and a change of

temporal  or  spatial  intervals  can  be  determined  only  if  a  coordinative

definition  of  congruence  has  previously  been  given.  For  this  reason  the

definition of the congruence of time intervals is connected with the problem

of a force field. The definition of congruence for time comparison is therefore

also the basis for the measurement of a force, and conversely this definition

of congruence can be given through the rules for the measurement of a force.

We must finally recall another difficulty which exists for any definition of

a closed system. We can never construct a system completely isolated from

external differential forces, because this is possible only to a certain degree of

approximation.  Consequently  we  can  define  only  the  concept closed to a

certain degree of approximation.  This  degree  of  approximation,  however,

depends on the relation between the external forces and the internal forces of

the system. In a given field of external (differential) forces, one system can

be relatively well closed, another relatively badly closed. Furthermore the

same  system  can  sometimes  be  relatively  well  closed,  and  sometimes

relatively badly closed, depending on the external (differential) field.


§ 18. CLOCKS USED IN PRACTICE

Let us consider in this connection the clocks in actual use. There is the

pendulum clock, the spring-balance clock (pocket watch), the earth clock,

and  finally  the  atomic  clock  of  the  revolving  electrons  within  the  atom.

Actually,  pendulum  clocks  are  not  clocks  because  they  are  not  closed

systems. They move only because of the earth’s gravitational force, which

belongs to the class of universal forces and could be eliminated by definition.

Simultaneously, always we find a differential force that affects the supporting

arrangement of the pendulum and compensates for the gravitational force.This elastic force is an external differential force which is essential, however,

because if it did not exist, the pendulum would not oscillate but would fall

freely. This force is of the same order of magnitude as the driving force of the

pendulum and the system is thus far from being closed. The pendulum clock

can  therefore  be  used  as  a  measure  of  uniform  time  only  with  certain

precautionary measures, namely, when the force of attraction of the earth is

constant. The pendulum clock is really nothing but an indicator of the earth’s

attraction, a force which is measured by the equations of mechanics, such that

it is constant when time is defined by truly closed clocks, as for example the
            50
earth clock. Therefore, even the pendulum clock may be taken as a measure

of uniform time. If we were to move a pendulum clock to a different latitude,

however, the same equations of mechanics would force us to consider the

unit of time of the clock as changed, since the strength of the gravitational

field of the earth is smaller near the equator than at the poles due to the

considerable flattening of the earth. The definition of time by means of the

pendulum  belongs  therefore  to  the  second  type  of  definition  given  in  the

previous section (page 117).

The spring-balance clock is a clock in our sense. The force that determines

the length of the pendular period of the balance wheel is the elastic force of

the spring, i.e., the internal force of the clock. Gravitation has no effect in

this case, and the indications of the spring-balance clock are thus independent

of latitude. This kind of clock would oscillate even if it were far away from

any  masses  in  interstellar  space,  whereas  the  pendulum  clock  would  not

operate under these conditions. We may therefore always think of a pocket

watch, when we talk of clocks in our future discussions, since it is the best

example of a closed system. For precise time measurements watches have

shortcomings, however, which make them inferior to the pendulum clock for

astronomical purposes. The elastic forces fluctuate slightly, i.e., the system is

not  strictly  periodic,  and  therefore,  although  this  system  is  closer  to  our

epistemological  ideal,  its  time  is  not  as  accurate  as  that  of  the  pendulum

clock. So long as pendulum clocks remain in the same place they satisfy the

condition of uniformity to a very high degree, because the earth’s attraction is

very  nearly  constant.  On  ships,  on  the  other  hand,  spring-balance

chronometers  are  used,  because  the  effect  of  geographical  latitude  would

otherwise be noticeable, and the rocking of the ship would cause fluctuations

in the elastic supporting forces which for pendulum clocks are of the same

order of magnitude as the driving forces.One should not forget, however, that the spring-balance clock too is only

approximately free from external physical forces. It must, for instance, be

placed on a firm support to prevent its fall in the gravitational field. This

elastic supporting force, which is external, affects the clock and causes a

slight bending of its gears and shafts. The spring-balance clock thus runs

somewhat differently, depending upon the side on which it rests. This effect

is extremely small, and we may say in our language: the external physical

forces are very small in comparison with the internal driving forces of the

clock. This type of clock is therefore closed to a relatively high degree of

accuracy. This applies, of course, only so long as the elastic forces are not too

large. If we were to fasten a pocket watch to a rotating disc, for instance, and

bring it into a strong centrifugal field, the supporting forces would increase

correspondingly and would bend the gears and shafts so much that the clock

could no longer be considered a closed system.

The  most  important  clock  for  practical  time  measurements  is  the  earth

clock.  We  have  already  mentioned  that  this  clock  too  needs  corrections

because it is not strictly periodic, but it is far superior in this respect to the

spring-balance clock. Since it floats freely in space and the effect of radiation

can be ignored, the earth clock is a well-closed system. There is a slight

disturbance  by  the  gravitational  effects  of  the  moon  and  sun;  they  act  as

brakes upon the earth’s rotation with the eventual result of a state like that of

the moon, for which the period of rotation equals that of the orbit. For a

single rotation, however, this effect can be ignored.

The earth clock has the characteristic that it moves uniformly even within

the individual period. Thus the unit of time can be subdivided by means of

angular measurements. On the other hand, the counting of periods is more

difficult, since the end of an individual period cannot be directly recognized.

What constitutes a complete rotation of the earth is definable only relative to

the  environment;  hence  the  difference  between  stellar  and  solar  day.  The

latter is about four minutes longer, because the period between two solar

culminations increases due to the orbital motion of the earth. If the earth were

alone in the universe, it would be useless as a clock, because we would have

no indication for the end of its individual periods. The earth clock is therefore

not a natural clock in our sense. In contrast to the pendulum clock it is closed,

but it differs from ideal clocks in the sense that it is not periodic. The earth’s

rotation is an inertial motion, and the definition of a measure of time bymeans of the earth clock should therefore be included among the definitions
                                                                      51
that use the law of inertia rather than a periodic system. Therefore, the

question  when  a  “real”  rotation  of  the  earth  has  been  completed  can  be

answered only on the basis of the laws of mechanics. The answer depends on

the  determination  of  the  astronomical  inertial  system  (compare  §  36),  to

which the earth’s rotation must be related for this purpose. Since the stellar

day  is  practically  identical  with  this  “day  of  the  inertial  system,”  it  is

generally preferred to the solar day.

One might suppose that these considerations are unnecessary as long as we

are  interested  only  in  the  uniformity  of  time  and  not  in  the  length  of  an

individual day, since we can employ the method of subdivision by angular

measurements  because  of  the  uniformity  within  a  period  of  the  earth’s

rotation. But how are we to measure this angle of rotation? It is well known

that the angle of rotation measured relative to the sun is not suitable for this

subdivision (because of the varying velocity of the earth along its path) but

only the angle relative to the fixed stars. The only difference is the following:

In  order  to  determine  uniformity  it  is  sufficient  to  know  the  state  of  the

astronomical  inertial  system  with  the  exception  of  a  uniform  rotation,

whereas for the determination of the length of a day even this variable must

be eliminated. Practically speaking, however, little is accomplished by the

admission  of  such  an  unknown  rotation,  since  the  determination  of  the

inertial system except for a uniform rotation contains almost all the problems

pertaining to the determination of the rotation-free inertial system.

We  should  finally  mention  the  atomic  clock,  which,  although  of  no

practical use, plays an important role in the experimental investigations of the

relativistic laws dealing with clocks. An electron within the atom revolves

with a high degree of precision and its period provides us therefore with a

very exact unit of time. The force that the nucleus of the atom exerts on the

electron, keeping it in a closed path, can be considered as the internal force of

the clock. The entire atom, and not the electron alone, is the clock the period

of which is indicated by the revolution of the electron. This clock is closed to

a very high degree since the external forces acting on an atom are very weak

compared to its strong internal forces. The atom would be an ideal clock

except for the results of quantum theory. We can never observe an atomic

clock as we observe other clocks; we can only measure the frequency of the

emitted radiation. According to the ideas of classical theory, the frequencywould be a direct measure of the period of the electron’s revolution, which

could thus be directly observed. Bohr’s discoveries have taught us, however,

that  the  atom  emits  light  in  an  entirely  different  fashion.  The  revolving

electron does not emit any light at all; consequently we have no knowledge of

its period of revolution. Light is emitted only when the electron jumps from

one orbit to another; the conditions of a periodic system are, therefore, not

satisfied.  Bohr’s  theory  has  shown  nevertheless  that  the  frequency  is

determined  by  the  stationary  states  between  which  the  jump  takes  place.

However this situation is much more complicated and the question arises

whether under these conditions the atom may still be regarded as a clock. As

long as we have no accurate information about the process of the emission of

light, we can only express conjectures at this point. On the other hand one

could, of course, investigate experimentally how far the atomic clock satisfies

the  relativistic  laws  of  clocks.  In  this  manner  we  might  discover  directly

whether  or  not  the  atom  can  be  regarded  as  a  clock  in  the  sense  of  the

relativistic theory of time.


§ 19. SIMULTANEITY

  After  we  had  specified  the  unit  of  time,  which  is  the  first  metrical

coordinative definition of time, we were led to the problem of uniformity,

which is the second metrical coordinative definition of time and deals with

the congruence of successive time intervals. There is however a second type

of time comparison that concerns parallel time intervals occurring at different

points in space rather than consecutive time intervals occurring at the same

point in space. The comparison of such time intervals leads to the problem of

simultaneity and hence to the third metrical coordinative definition of time.

Although it had been known for some time that uniformity is a matter of
                    52
definition—Mach, for instance, asserted the definitional character of the

uniformity of time emphatically—the definitional character of simultaneity

was  recognized  first  by  Einstein  and  has  since  become  famous  as  the

relativity of time. Einstein immediately applied his solution of the problem of

simultaneity to theoretical physics and for this reason the epistemological

character  of  his  discovery  has  never  been  clearly  distinguished  from  the

physical results. Therefore, we shall not follow the road taken by Einstein,

which is closely connected with the principle of the constancy of the velocity

of light, but begin with the epistemological problem.To  see  this  problem  clearly,  we  must  start  with  a  distinction  which

originated  with  the  work  of  Einstein.  We  shall  distinguish  between  the

simultaneity at the same place and the simultaneity of spatially separated

events. Only the latter contains the actual problem of simultaneity; the first is

strictly speaking not a simultaneity of time points, but an identity. Such a

concurrence of events at the same place and at the same time is called a

coincidence. In a strict coincidence there is actually no comparison of space

or  time  since  position  and  time  are  identical  for  both  events.  Practically

speaking, such an identity never occurs since we could no longer distinguish

the  two  events.  But  an  approximate  coincidence  can  be  realized,  in  the

example of two colliding spheres or two intersecting light rays. Simultaneity

plays  no  essential  role  even  in  the  case  of  a  roughly  approximated

coincidence, because a time comparison of distant events shows such slight

differences in the determination of the time of neighboring events that they

can be ignored. We can therefore treat the problem of the comparison of

neighboring events similarly to the problem of coincidence and restrict our
                                                        1
investigation to the comparison of distant events.

This investigation will lead us to the result that the simultaneity of distant

events is based on a coordinative definition. We shall demonstrate this result

by showing that a comparison of time has the characteristic properties of a

coordinative definition. We therefore maintain:

First,  it  is  impossible  to  ascertain  whether  two  distant  clocks  are  set

“correctly” in their indication of time; second, they can be set arbitrarily and

yet no contradiction will arise.

  Following the first line of thought, we may ask how one can determine the

simultaneity  of  distant  events.  We  shall  consider  events  as  distant,  if  the

distance between them is large compared with the dimensions of the human
                                                        1
body. The perceptual judgment of simultaneity  For a rigorous treatment of

the comparison of neighboring events, see A., § 8. is thus not sufficient under

these  circumstances.  We  may  hear  for  instance  the  sound  of  thunder  and

notice  at  the  same  time  that  the  hands  of  our  watch  point  to  8:50.  The

determination  of  simultaneity  which  we  make  here  is  a  comparison  of

neighboring events; we compare the moment when the watch indicates 8:50

with the moment when the sound of thunder reaches our ear and not with the

instant of its occurrence. If we want to derive from this time determination

the  actual  time  at  which  the  thunder  occurred,  we  must  have  additionalphysical facts. We must know the distance which the sound has traveled and

the velocity of sound, before we can calculate backwards from 8:50 to the

time at which the thunder took place.

But are there no other means? It is well known that we can avoid using the

velocity of sound in the given example, if we observe the lightning rather

than the thunder. Let us say that the lightning was observed at 8h 49m 50s;

we may then consider this time as the time at which both lightening and

thunder  occurred.  Is  this  statement  true?  Obviously,  in  this  type  of  time

determination the situation is changed quantitatively but not in principle. The

light of the lightning also requires a certain amount of time to reach the eye,

and our judgment therefore concerns again the moment at which the light

reaches our eye and not the moment when the lightning actually occurred.

Only because this time difference is extremely small can we ignore it for

practical purposes.

It can easily be seen that the time comparison of distant events is possible

only because a signal sent from one place to another is a causal chain. This

process leads to a coincidence, i.e., a comparison of neighboring events, and

from the time measurement thus obtained we can determine the time of the

distant  event  only  with  the  help  of  an inference.  What  assumptions  are

contained in this inference?

This  inference  requires  besides  the  knowledge  of  the  distance  also  the

knowledge of the velocity of the signal. How can this velocity be measured?

In principle, there exists only one method, which we shall schematize as

follows. The signal leaves a point P at the time t and reaches a point P at
                                          112

the time t. Its velocity is then given by the quotient of the time interval t—t
          221

and  the  distance P—P  Therefore, two  time  measurements  are  required
                      21.

which have to be made at different places. We can think of them as given by

two clocks located at P and P. If the indication of the time interval t—t is
                          1221

to  be  meaningful,  however,  the  two  clocks  must  have  been  synchronized

previously, i.e., it must have been determined whether their hands occupied

the same positions at the same time. In order to measure a velocity, therefore,

the simultaneity of distant events must already be known.

Is  this  statement  correct?  Did  not  Fizeau  measure  the  velocity  of  light

differently? Fizeau indeed used an arrangement which did not require the

simultaneity of distant events. We can schematize his measuring arrangementas follows. In Fig. 16 a light ray is sent from A at the time t = 12:00; it is
                                                                        1

reflected at the point B, which is at a distance l from A, and finally returns to

A at t = 12:06. It has required 6 minutes to travel twice the distance l, and its
    3

velocity is thus given by the ratio of these two numbers. In this arrangement,

time is measured only at A, only one clock is used and the simultaneity of

distant events does not affect the problem. Of course, in the actual experiment

the time interval was much smaller than 6 minutes, even though l was several

kilometers long, but Fizeau measured it by an ingenious device involving a

rotating  gear.  We  have  simply  chosen  larger  numbers  to  clarify  the

illustration.









 
                      Fig. 16. Round trip of a light signal.



On closer examination, we notice that this measurement contains a certain

untested assumption, namely, that the velocity of light is the same in both

directions along l. For instance, if it were less, in the direction AB than in the

direction BA, the velocity of light as calculated by Fizeau would correspond

to neither of the two velocities, but represent an average of the two. How can

we prove this assumption by Fizeau?

It seems that it can be proved only if the time t is known at which the light
                                                        2

ray reaches B. This means, however, that we are again employing two clocks

and a comparison of distant events. Our assertion that the measurement of

any  velocity  in  one  direction  presupposes  a  knowledge  of  simultaneity  is

therefore correct.

  Thus we are faced with a circular argument. To determine the simultaneity

of distant events we need to know a velocity, and to measure a velocity we

require knowledge of the simultaneity of distant events. The occurrence of

this circularity proves that simultaneity is not a matter of knowledge, but of a

coordinative definition, since the logical circle shows that a knowledge ofsimultaneity is impossible in principle.

We also notice that the second characteristic of a coordinative definition,

namely its arbitrariness, is satisfied. It is arbitrary which time we ascribe to

the arrival of the light ray at B. If we assume it to be 12:03, the velocity of

light becomes equal in both directions. If we assume it to be 12:02, the light

ray  requires  2  minutes  in  one  direction  and  4  minutes  in  the  other;  this

assumption is equally compatible with Fizeau’s measurements. It does not

make sense, therefore, to call the time 12:02 false or improbable, since we are

here concerned not with an empirical statement but with a definition. This

definition determines at once the velocity of light and simultaneity, and such

a  determination  can  therefore  never  lead  to  contradictions.  If  we  wish  to

determine by velocity measurements which events are simultaneous, we shall

always  obtain  that  simultaneity  which  has  already  been  introduced  by

definition.

It is this consideration that teaches us how to understand the definition of

simultaneity given by Einstein







ty = ti+3(ts—h)
                                          (1)



which  defines  the  time  of  arrival  of  the  light  ray  at B  as  the  mid-point

between the time that the light was sent from A and the time that it returned to

A. This definition is essential for the special theory of relativity, but it is not

epistemologically necessary. Einstein’s definition, too, is just one possible

definition. If we were to follow an arbitrary rule restricted only to the form







t = hitelta—t1)
                                          (2)0<e<1
                                          (3)



it would likewise be adequate and could not be called false. If the special

theory of relativity prefers the first definition, i.e., sets ∈ equal to  , it does

so on the ground that this definition leads to simpler relations. It is clear that

we are dealing here merely with descriptive simplicity, the nature of which

will be explained in § 27. The arbitrariness is restricted only by condition (3)

which specifies that t must lie between t and t; otherwise the signal would
                        213

arrive at B at a time earlier than its departure from A. The epistemological

significance of this restriction will be discussed in detail in § 22.

  These  considerations  have  shown  that  simultaneity  is  a  matter  of  a

coordinative  definition.  Simultaneity  also  has  the  peculiar  dual  character

which we can most easily observe in the definition of the unit of length. What

we mean by a unit of length can be defined conceptually: a unit of length is a

distance with which other distances are compared. Which distance serves as a

unit for actual measurements can ultimately be given only by reference to

some  actual  distance.  The  same  is  true  of  simultaneity.  We  can  give  a

conceptual  definition  of  “simultaneity”:  two  events  at  distant  places  are

simultaneous if the time scales at the respective places indicate the same time

value for these events. What time points of parallel time scales do receive the

same time value can ultimately be determined only by reference to actual

events. This reference is essentially of the form: “These particular events are

to be called simultaneous.” We say with regard to the measuring rod as well

as with regard to simultaneity that only “ultimately” the reference is to be

conceived in this form, because we know that by means of the interposition

of conceptual relations the reference may be rather remote. We may recall

here the example of the determination of a unit of length by reference to a

color,  mentioned  in  §  4,  where  the  reference  is  not  directly  to  a  spatial

distance.  Correspondingly,  we  find  that  the  reference  in  the  definition  of

simultaneity is commonly not in terms of the occurrence of arbitrary events,

but in terms of light, i.e., a physical process, the properties of which are

utilized in the definition of simultaneity. In this fashion we are able to replace

a direct reference by a description of operations which can easily be repeated,since  it  is  commonly  understood  what  is  meant  by  “light”  and  by  these

operations. The definition of simultaneity through the use of light signals, for

instance Einstein’s definition, cannot be compared to the definition of the

meter by means of the Parisian standard meter, but is to be compared to the

definition  of  the  meter  by  means  of  the  earth’s  circumference.  In  this

definition the physical phenomenon the earth’s circumference corresponds to

the physical phenomenon light in the definition of simultaneity, and the rule

“count off 40 million times” corresponds to the rule “send a light signal from

A to B and back and set the time of arrival at B equal to the average of the

two  time  values  at A.”  Such  a  rule  does  not  change  the  nature  of  the

coordinative  definition,  since  what  is  meant  by  “light”  and  “the

circumference  of  the  earth”  can  ultimately  be  determined  only  through  a

direct reference.

The conceptual definition which we related to the coordinative definition

of simultaneity may appear empty; it is tautological to define simultaneity as

the equality of time values on parallel time scales. But the situation is no

different for any other conceptual definition. All conceptual definitions are

tautological in this sense, since they deal exclusively with analytic relations.

A  concept  is  coordinated  to  a  combination  of  certain  other  concepts  and

derives its meaning only from these other concepts. The conceptual definition

of the unit of length is also a tautology in this sense. Yet the desire for a

different conceptual definition of simultaneity has a certain justification. We

mean more when we speak of simultaneity; we are searching for a rule that

restricts the determination of the parallel time scales in a special fashion. An

answer to this question can only be given by the causal theory of time which

we  shall  develop  in  §  21  and  §  22.  We  anticipate,  however,  that  this

investigation will not eliminate the relativity of simultaneity but only justify

the restriction of arbitrariness given in (3).


§ 20. ATTEMPTS TO DETERMINE ABSOLUTE

SIMULTANEITY

Before we proceed from these results to further problems, we shall first

discuss some of the objections that have been raised against the arbitrariness

of  simultaneity.  The  answers  to  these  objections  will  assure  us  that  the

solution of the problem of simultaneity is correct. These criticisms consist in

various attempts to establish absolute simultaneity.The first of these attempts starts with the idea of using velocities greater

than the velocity of light. As a result, the interval t—t of definition (2, § 19)
                                                          31

would be shortened and the definition of simultaneity would become less

arbitrary. If there existed a signal with infinite velocity, the interval would

equal zero and absolute simultaneity would be established. Even if an infinite

velocity could not be attained, the inaccuracy could be made as small as

desired by means of correspondingly high velocities. Such an approximation

would suffice to define absolute simultaneity as a limit. Indeed, if arbitrarily

high velocities could be reached, there would be absolute simultaneity. The

relation between signal velocity and the interpretation of the word “absolute”

will be discussed in § 22. We may comment at this place, however, that this

objection is pointless, since there are no signals that travel faster than light.

We do not mean merely that physics has not yet discovered a higher velocity,

but rather the positive assertion that there can be no higher velocity. Reasons

for making this assertion will be given in § 32.

The  second  group  of  attempts  to  define  absolute  simultaneity  uses

specially conceived mechanisms. We can imagine an electrical mechanism of
                                                53
this type to be built according to Fig. 17. The current from battery E flows

through galvanometer G if the two switches T and T are closed. If only one
                                                      12

of the two switches is closed, no current flows through G. Let us imagine

now  that T  and T  are  closed  for  an  instant.  If  these  two  instants  are
            12

simultaneous, the circuit will be closed and a brief impulse of electric current

will flow through G  which  will  show  a  single  deflection.  If  they  are  not

simultaneous, the circuit will never be closed and no deflection will occur in

G. The deflection in G is therefore the criterion for the simultaneity of the

two events, and this simultaneity is defined without arbitrariness.  Fig. 17. An attempt to determine absolute simultaneity by means of an

                                electrical arrangement.



  However ingenious this attempt may appear, closer examination reveals

where  it  fails.  It  uses  a  far  too  primitive  theory  of  electric  currents.  The

property of an electric current to flow only in a completely closed circuit

holds  for  stationary  states  alone.  Under  rapidly  changing  conditions,

however,  the  electric  current  shows  entirely  different  properties.  The

occurrences during a momentary closing of the two switches can be described

as  follows.  Let  us  assume  that  only T  is  closed  for  a  moment.  The
                                                  1

electromagnetic field, which had previously spread from E to T, proceeds
                                                                              1

now to G (and further to the lower side of T). The electrons in the wire are
                                                    2

set  in  motion  and  a  short  impulse  of  current  flows  through G.  The

characteristics of this current are those of a displacement current because of

the capacity of the open contact T. G will thus show a deflection if it is a
                                        2

sensitive  galvanometer,  which,  of  course,  must  be  assumed  for  these

experiments. Thus we observe a deflection even though only one of the two

switches is closed. If in addition we close switch T, a second impulse of
                                                              2

current  results  which  increases  the  deflection  in G.  It  is  irrelevant  here

whether T and T are closed simultaneously or within a short interval of
          12

time. In either case we obtain the same deflection consisting of the sum of the

two impulses.

  Only  if  the  difference  in  time  is  so  great  that  the  disturbance  of  the

electromagnetic field which spreads from T through G has already reached
                                                    1

T  when  the  second  switch  is  closed,  will  there  be  a  difference  in  the
2

magnitude of the deflection in G. The propagation of the electromagnetic

field from T to T travels however with the velocity of light; thus there exists
            12

a small interval of time within which the two impulses of current may follow

one another without any difference in the effect on G. It is therefore not

permissible to conclude from the deflection in G that the two switches were

closed simultaneously; they might as well have been closed within a small

interval of time.

This  mechanism  therefore  does  not  yield  a  decisive  method  for

simultaneity.  It  leaves  as  much  arbitrariness  as  the  determination  ofsimultaneity  by  means  of  signals,  since  the  signal  in  this  case  is  an

electromagnetic  disturbance  which  likewise  propagates  with  the  speed  of

light.  The  entire  arrangement  is  really  nothing  but  a  disguised  signaling

process. What happens when the circuit is closed at T depends, according to
                                                              2

the law of action by contact, only on the state of the electric field in the

immediate  environment  of T.  Whether T  is  open  or  closed  is  therefore
                                  21

irrelevant. Only if the disturbance of the field, caused by the earlier closing of

T, has already advanced to T will there be any effect on the happenings at
12

T. In this case the circuit must have been closed at T just early enough to
21

permit the disturbance to travel the distance TGT with the velocity of light.
                                                      12

Letting  this  time  interval  be t,  we  can  state  that  the  magnitude  of  the

deflection  in G  tells  us  only  whether  the  difference  in  time  between  the

closing of switches T and T is greater than t. If this difference is less than 
                        12

t, it is impossible to decide whether or not the two switches were closed

simultaneously.

The electrical mechanisms for the determination of absolute simultaneity

fail because electric effects propagate with the velocity of light. The relations

of a stationary circuit suggest at first sight action at a distance, but actually no

violation of the principle of action by contact occurs. The principle of action

by contact is one of the most basic laws of physics. It is impossible for the

effect of an occurrence to be immediately noticeable at any arbitrary distance.

The effect spreads by traveling through all intermediate points. This principle

applies to every form of causal propagation. Gravitation, for instance, offers

no  exception  and  the  Newtonian  law  of  gravitation  is  correct  only  under

stationary conditions. For rapidly moving systems, this law must be corrected
                                                                                  54
to  account  for  the  finite  speed  of  the  propagation  of  gravitation.   One

should  not  conclude,  however,  that  the  principle  of  action  by  contact

necessarily implies the existence of a finite limit to the speed of all causal

propagation.  The  principle  excludes  only  infinite  velocities,  whereas  it  is

compatible  with  any  arbitrarily  high  velocity.  If  we  wish  to  assert  the

existence of a finite limit, this assertion will have to be added to the principle

of action by contact. Only this addition enables us to assert that there is no

mechanism capable of determining absolute simultaneity. Even gravitational

forces cannot be used for such a mechanism, since they also spread with the

velocity of light.We may therefore omit the different mechanisms that have been invented

for  the  determination  of  absolute  simultaneity,  because  all  of  them  are

variations of the same fundamental idea and fail because each presupposes, in

a more or less disguised form, an infinite or arbitrarily high velocity of causal

propagation.  We  shall  mention  one  more  example,  which  involves  a

misconception of rigid bodies. Let a rigid rod rest with its ends on the marks

A and B (Fig. 18). If the rod is suddenly grasped at A and pulled to the left, its

ends no longer cover the points A and B. The two moments at which the

coincidences of A and B  with  the  two  ends  of  the  rod  are  lost,  must  be

absolutely  simultaneous  according  to  the  laws  of  classical  physics.  This

cannot be admitted in a physics which includes the principle of action by

contact; in such a physics there are no absolutely rigid bodies. When the rod

is grasped at A, the end which rested on B does not move immediately, since

the  effect  spreads  by  means  of  an  elastic  propagation  from A  to B.  The

velocity of this elastic propagation cannot be greater than the velocity of light

(actually it is smaller). Therefore, this arrangement cannot be used for the

determination of simultaneity. With the existence of a limit for all causal

propagation,  not  only  infinite  velocities  but  absolutely  rigid  bodies  are

excluded.









Fig. 18. An attempt to determine absolute simultaneity by means of moving a

                                        rigid rod.



  Since absolute simultaneity cannot be attained through causal propagation,

the possibility of a fundamentally different method might be envisaged. This

leads  to  a  third  attempt  at  a  determination  of  absolute  simultaneity,  to

“absolute transport time.”

This  procedure  uses  the  transport  of  clocks  to  establish  absolute

simultaneity. The two clocks are synchronized when close together (i.e., the

hands are in the same position at the same time) and then one of them ismoved. We then have a clock at a distant point synchronized with the first

one. We shall call this arrangement of clocks a transport-synchronization.

A criticism of this method can be carried out in either of two ways. First

we  may  investigate  whether  the  transport  of  clocks  actually  leads  to  a

simultaneity that is free from contradiction. This investigation presupposes

that the time indications of clocks are independent of the path and velocity of

transport,  i.e.,  the  following  assertion  would  have  to  be  true:  two  clocks,

synchronized at one place, are still synchronized when they are brought to a

different place along different paths with different speeds. This statement,

however, is denied by relativistic physics (cf. § 30). Either alternative seems

possible, but only experience can decide which of them holds for reality.

Even without the assumptions of relativistic physics we can state that the

possibility of transport-synchronization depends on an empirical assumption

that must be tested.

  However, if relativistic physics were wrong, and the transport of clocks

could be shown to be independent of path and velocity, this type of time

comparison could not change our epistemological results, since the transport

of clocks can again offer nothing but a definition of simultaneity. Even if the

two clocks correspond when they are again brought together, how can we

know whether or not both have changed in the meantime? This question is as

undecidable as the question of the comparison of length of rigid rods. Again,

a solution can be given only if the comparison of time is recognized as a

definition. If there exists a unique transport-synchronization, it is still merely

a definition of simultaneity.

We can characterize the peculiarity of the transport-synchronization clearly

if  we  use  the  Minkowskian  picture  of  the  four-dimensional  space-time

manifold. The transport of a clock constitutes a causal chain spreading from

the point event E to the point event E′. In this respect there is no difference
                  12

between  this  method  and  the  method  which  employs  signals  for  the

determination of simultaneity. Here too we find that the comparison of time

is established with the aid of a causal chain. While the signal simultaneity

uses the velocity of the causal propagation, the transport of clocks makes use

of different considerations.

Here we can imagine points marked off on the causal chain EE′ (Fig. 19),
                                                                          12

which are produced by the transported clock whenever it completes a unit oftime. At the same time the clock that remains subdivides the chain EE, and
                                                                                  12

the time comparison between E′ and E results from counting the number of
                                    22

sections on the two causal curves. It is obvious that this comparison of time

presupposes  that  the  marked-off  sections  are  of  equal  length.  But  this

presupposition is based on a coordinative definition and the analogy to the

definition of spatial congruence is clearly seen. The theory of absolute time

states that the diagram necessarily looks like Fig. 19b, but it is clear that at

first the clocks furnish only the irregular relations of Fig. 19a and that this

figure must be redefined in order to coincide with Fig. 19b. An additional

assumption,  which  alone  makes  such  a  redefinition  univocal,  must  be

recognized. It is the assumption that a clock which moves along a differently

winding world-line from E to E′ marks off the same number of sections. Of
                              12

course, this is an empirical assumption.




















E B}

E,

 

Ey

By
  Fig. 19. Definition of simultaneity by means of the transport of clocks.



The absolute transport time, if uniquely defined, would give us nothing but

a definition of simultaneity, which is a definition in the same sense as the

definition of congruence by means of rods. The theory of relativity, however,

maintains the existence of an essential difference. Whereas the congruence of

rods is independent of the path of transport, that of clocks is not. The theoryof relativity excludes the transport time because of this physical fact.

We summarize the results of the preceding sections as follows. The time

metric depends on three coordinative definitions. The first deals with the unit

of time and determines the numerical value of a time interval. The second

deals  with uniformity  and  refers  to  the  comparison  of  successive  time

intervals.  The  third  deals  with simultaneity  and  is  concerned  with  the

comparison  of  time  intervals  which  are  parallel  to  each  other  at  different

points in space. These three definitions are required in order to make a time

measurement possible; without them the problem of the measurement of time

is logically undetermined.

  There  is  neither  absolute  simultaneity  nor  absolute  uniformity,  if  we

understand by “absolute” the property that this time is the only correct time.

However, there remains the possibility that physical mechanisms or the entire

system of physical laws might distinguish one definition as simpler than the

others. In this sense there might be an absolute time. For instance, we know

from experience that the definition of uniformity by means of clocks or of the

law of inertia is distinguished from others by its simplicity. This distinction is

maintained  in  the  special  theory  of  relativity  and  vanishes  only  for  more

general  gravitational  fields.  Among  the  definitions  of  simultaneity,  those

based on the infinite limiting velocity or the transport of clocks might turn

out to be the simplest. Whether or not they do is an empirical question; both

possibilities are denied by the special theory of relativity. Hence this theory

played an important role in the clarification of the definitional character of

simultaneity.


§ 21. TIME ORDER

In  the  preceding  sections  we  have  developed  the  three metrical

coordinative definitions of time, which concern the unit of time, uniformity

and  simultaneity.  We  shall  now  turn  to  another  type  of  coordinative

definitions,  namely,  the topological  ones.  We  shall  present  two  such

definitions.

The first topological determination of time deals with time order at the

same point. Consider an observer at a certain point who has to decide the

temporal order of two events, both of which occur at the same place. This

aspect of temporal order corresponds to the relation greater than in the seriesof numbers and we shall represent it by the same symbol. “E > E” means
                                                                          21

therefore: “E is later than E.”
              21

  With  respect  to  two  events  that  are  sufficiently  separated  in  time,  the

observer  has  an  immediate  experience  of  time  order,  and  he  uses  this

experience  as  the  basis  for  the  ordering  of  the  events.  However,  in  this

chapter,  we  shall  not  refer  to  the  subjective  experience  of  time  order.

Subsequently  it  will  be  shown  that  it  is  in  principle  impossible  to  use

subjective feelings for the determination of the order of external events. We

must therefore establish a different criterion.

  Such a criterion is found in the causal relation. If E is the effect of E, then
                                                              21

E is called later than E. This is the topological coordinative definition of
21

time order. To complete this statement we should add that it also applies to

the case where E is only a partial cause of E or where E is only a partial
                  122

effect of E.
          1

It is obvious that with the definition of “later than” we have also given the

definition of “ earlier than.” The second relation is nothing but the converse

of the first. If E is later than E, then E is earlier than E. This follows
                  2112

analytically and needs no new coordinative definition.

  However, we must now make sure that our definition of “later than” does

not involve circular reasoning. Can we actually recognize what is a cause and

what is an effect without knowing their temporal order? Should we not argue,

rather, that of two causally connected events the effect is the later one?

This  objection  proceeds  from  the  assumption  that  causality  indicates  a

connection between two events, but does not assign a direction to them. This

assumption, however, is erroneous. Causality establishes not a symmetrical

but an asymmetrical relation between two events. If we represent the cause-

effect relation by the symbol C, the two cases




                                                      C(E, E) and C(E, E)
                                                            1221




can  be  distinguished;  experience  tells  us  which  of  the  two  cases  actuallyoccurs. We can state this distinction as follows:

If E is the cause of E, then a small variation (a mark)’ in E is associated
      121

with  a  small  variation  in  E, whereas  small  variations  in  E are  not
                                    22

associated with variations in E.
                                  1

If we wish to express even more clearly that this formulation does not

contain the concept of temporal order, we can express it in the following

form, where the events that show a slight variation are designated by E*:

We observe only the combinations







  

E\Ey
                                          (1)



and never the combination







Ey*Ey
                                          (2)



In this arrangement the two events are asymmetrical and therefore it defines

an order. That event which appears in the unobserved combination without

an asterisk, namely E, is called the effect and furthermore the temporally
                        2

later event.

It should be noted that assertions (1) and (2) were obtained without the

presupposition of an order. We could have placed the event E first in these
                                                                          2

combinations and would still have been able to distinguish E as the effect.
                                                                          2

On  the  other  hand,  we  have  made  the  assumption  that  we  are  able  to

distinguish between E and E*, i.e., that we know which of the two events has

the  special  mark.  We  may  do  so  because E*  is  to  be  interpreted  as  a

combination (E, e) where e signifies an additional event, namely, the specialmark.  Just  as  we  may  assume  that E  and E  can  be  recognized  as  two
                                              12

separate  events,  we  may  assume  that E*  can  be  recognized  as  the

combination of two separate events. This assumption lies within the frame of

our  schematization,  which  presupposes  that  we  can  distinguish  individual

events. We cannot justify this schematization within the frame of our present

discussion,  which  is  limited  to  space  and  time,  since  such  a  justification

belongs to the analysis of the concept of causality. Here we must be satisfied

with the assertion that the space-time problem cannot be solved at all without
                        55
some schematization.

An example: We send a light ray from A to B. If we hold a red glass in the

path of the light at A, the light will also be red at B. If we hold the red glass in

the path of the light at B, it will not be colored at A.

  Another example: We throw a stone from A to B. If we mark the stone with

a piece of chalk at A, it will carry the same mark when it arrives at B (event

E). If we mark the stone only on its arrival at B, then the stone leaving A
2

(event E) has no mark.
        1

This distinction appears trivial, but it is extremely significant. A theory of

causality which ignores this elementary difference has neglected the most

essential aspect. The procedure which we have described is used constantly

in everyday life to establish a time order, and we have no other method in

many scientific investigations where time intervals are too short to be directly

observable. We must therefore include the mark principle in the foundations

of the theory of time.

We have in the above principle a criterion for causal order that does not

employ the direction of time, and we can therefore use it in our definition of

time order. There exists a topological coordinative definition for time order.

We can base it in general on the concept of the causal chain, in which the

order of events corresponds to the order of time. Occasionally one speaks

also of signals or signal chains. It should be noted that the word “signal”

means the transmission of signs and hence concerns the very principle of

causal order which we have discussed.

We have to distinguish here between two problems. First, the procedure

described leads to an order of time, in the same sense in which the points on

a line are ordered. Such a series of points has two directions, neither of which

has any distinguishing characteristic. Temporal order, too, has two directions,the direction to earlier and the direction to later events, but in this case one of

the two directions has a distinguishing characteristic: time flows from the

earlier to the later event. Time therefore represents not only an ordered series

generated by an asymmetrical relation, but is also unidirectional. This fact is

usually  ignored.  We  often  say  simply:  the  direction  from  earlier  to  later

events, from cause to effect, is the direction of the progress of time. However,

in this form the assertion is empty unless we specify what “progress of time”

means. In the same fashion we could say that the points on a line progress

from left to right; but this assertion is empty, since the progress of points

means here nothing but the progressing in the selected direction. When we

speak about the progress of time, in contrast, we intend to make a synthetic

assertion  which  refers  both  to  an  immediate  experience  and  to  physical

reality. This particular problem can only be solved if we can formulate the

content of the assertion more precisely. We shall leave this problem for the

time being and content ourselves with the conclusion that the direction which

we have defined as earlier-later is the same direction as that of the progress of

time. For the problems dealt with in the theory of relativity it suffices that

there exists a serial order of time, i.e., that we can distinguish between two

directions which are opposite to each other. At present, we shall not refer to

the unidirectional character of time.

We  must  now  investigate  the  question  whether  the  time  order  defined

above can be carried through consistently.

If a contradiction did occur, it would manifest itself as follows: According

to one analysis, E would be later than E, and according to another E would
                    212

be earlier than E. This result would lead to the schema of Fig. 20, in which
                  1

there is a causal chain from E to E such that E is an effect of E, while
                                    1221

there is also a causal chain that makes E an effect of E. The combination
                                                12

would result in a causal chain that returns to its origin. In order to exclude

such a contradiction we must make the assumption that there are no closed

causal chains. 
                          Fig. 20. A closed causal chain.



At first glance, one might suppose that this assumption goes too far and

that  indeed  there  occur  closed  causal  chains  in  certain  mechanisms,  the

prototype of which is the electric bell. The pulling (P) of the lever causes a

break (B) in the current, which in turn causes the return (R) of the lever; this

switches on (S), the current which finally again pulls (P) the lever. It appears

as though this chain of events could be diagramed as in Fig. 21a, which

represents a closed curve. The mistake in this argument, however, is easily

seen. The individual pulls of the lever are different events; i.e., although they

are of the same kind, they are not identical events. Consequently, the chain

should be diagramed as in Fig. 21b, namely, as an open chain. Our principle

of the mark forces us to this conception. If we make some change in B, for
                                                                                    1

instance by short-circuiting the current and thus preventing the return of the

lever, then P  will  no  longer  occur.  However,  such  interference  does  not
              2

change P. Now it is clear what we mean by a closed chain, namely, a chain
        1

that returns to identically the same event, not to one of the same kind. 
              Fig. 21 a and b. The mechanism of an electric bell.



It seems obvious that there are no such chains. Yet the statement that there

are  no  closed  causal  chains  expresses  merely  a  conclusion  drawn  from

experience, which has thus far been confirmed without exception. We could

imagine experiences which would disprove this statement.

  Such conceptions are not unfamiliar. In the form of a periodic return of all

physical  events,  they  have  played  a  role  in  many  cosmologies.  It  is

conceivable—although of course there is no evidence for it—that some day

the entire universe will return to a previous state in every detail and start from

there anew on the identical course of events. Such an occurrence would leave

us the choice of interpreting the chain of events either according to Fig. 21a

or according to Fig. 21b. As in the problem of space we have here the choice

of regarding two states of the same kind either as identical or only as similar.

Our principle of the mark fails here for a reason to be explained later. This

property of the world as a whole has no significance for individual events and

we  can  thus  limit  the  definition  of  time  order  for  our  purposes  to  causal

chains  within  one  world  period,  the  starting  point  of  which  is  to  be

considered arbitrary. It is therefore not the case of a periodic universe, but a

more  complicated  one,  which  interests  us  as  a  counterexample  to  our

assumption.

Let us assume that some individual world-lines are closed whereas others

are not. We shall examine this assumption by the help of an example, in orderto see what fundamental principles would have to be abandoned.

  World-lines  I  and  II  of Fig. 22  are  both  world-lines  of  human  beings.

World-line I is normal, while world-line II does not intersect itself directly,

but is represented by a curve which, like a spiral, is not really closed but

merely returns to the neighborhood of one of its points. This fact is indicated

by the little arc at that particular point. A causal connection between the

neighboring parts of this world-line can be established by means of signals

(speech) within the region of the small arc. If you were the individual of

world-line II, you would have the following experience.


















        Fig. 22. A closed and an open world-line next to each other.



  Some day you meet a man who claims that you are his earlier self. He can

give you complete information about your present condition and might even

tell you precisely what you are thinking. He also predicts your distant future,

in which you will some day be in his position and meet your earlier self. Of

course you would think the man insane and would walk on. Your companion

on world-line I agrees with you. The stranger goes his way with a knowing

smile; you lose sight of him as well as of your companion on world-line I and

forget about both of them. Years later you meet a younger man whom you

suddenly recognize as your earlier self. You tell him verbatim what the older

man had told you; he doesn’t believe you and thinks you are insane. This

time you are the one that leaves with a knowing smile. You also see yourformer companion again, exactly as old as he was when you last saw him.

However, he denies any acquaintance with you and agrees with your younger

self that you must be insane. After this encounter, however, you walk along

with him. Your younger self disappears from sight and from then on you lead

a normal life.

  These events would be very strange, but not logically impossible. We can

now  recognize  those  fundamental  principles  which  would  have  to  be

abandoned if these events should actually occur.

We could no longer speak of the uniqueness of the present moment. On the

same world-line there would be periodic “now-points” one after the other. In

region R we would find two now-points of the same world-line in causal

interaction; and under these circumstances we would lose the possibility of

conceiving of the self as one identical individual in the course of time. There

would  be  on  this  world-line  a  succession  of  new  individuals  who  would

travel the same world-line at certain intervals. On world-line I we must also

mark  off  such  periods;  however,  the  individuals  of  this  world-line  would

never  notice  one  another  since  their  now-points  never  enter  into  causal

interaction.

We can thus recognize that not only the uniqueness of time order, but also

the identity of the individual during the passage of time, would be lost. This

is the main difficulty in trying to imagine such events. We also recognize

those properties of the causal chain which underlie the familiar concept of

individuality.  This  concept  originates  in  the  fact  that  there  are  no  closed

causal chains.

We  face  here  a  fundamental  principle  controlling  physical  reality.  It

enables  us  to  speak  of  a  unique  time  order  and  of  a  unique  now-point.

Furthermore, it makes possible the concept of the individual that remains
                                            56
identical  during  the  passage  of  time.  It  is  therefore  the  most  important

axiom regarding time order, and we realize to what an extent the familiar

concept of time order is based on this characteristic of causality. Of course,

this axiom is a result of experience; hence events of the type described above

cannot be excluded a priori.

  Besides this axiom there are several other less important axioms regarding

time  order.  They  deal  with  the  continuity  of  time  order  and  are  likewise

empirical statements about the nature of causal relations.§ 22. THE COMPARISON OF TIME

We now turn to the comparison of two time series at different points in

space. For this purpose we shall again use signals. We must first make the

assumption that there always are connecting signals between any two points

in space. Since we use signals, our previous definition of time order offers an

important result. Let E be the event of the departure of the signal from P, and

E′ the event of its arrival at P′; then E and E′ are two events connected by a

signal; consequently they are ordered; E′ must be later than E. Certain events

are  therefore  already  ordered  although  they  belong  to  different  temporal

sequences.

  Not  all  events  are  ordered,  however.  To  clarify  this  situation,  we  shall

introduce the auxiliary concept of first-signal. If several kinds of signals are

sent from P at the same moment, they will arrive at P′ at different times. To

order the times of their arrivals at P′ we need only the time series at P′. That

particular signal having the earliest time of arrival at P′ is called the first-

signal; it is therefore defined as the fastest message carrier between any two

points  in  space.  The  existence  of  first-signals  can  be  derived  from  our

previous axioms.

We now send a first-signal from P, calling the event of its departure E
                                                                                          1

(Fig. 23). The event of its arrival at P′ is called E’. Simultaneously with the

arrival of this signal, another first-signal is sent from P′. The arrival of this

signal at P is the event E. We ask for the order of E′ relative to E and E.
                            212

According to definition we have




                                              E′ is later than E 
                                                                  1

                                              E′ is earlier than E
                                                                    2




Let E be an event at P between E and E. What is the position of E relative
                                      12

to E′? Here, our definition of time order fails. A first-signal sent from E

would arrive at P’ later than E’, and a first-signal from E′ arrives at P later

than E,  as  can  easily  be  seen  from Fig. 23.  It  is  therefore  impossible  to

connect the events E and E′ in either direction by a signal, and their timeorder  is  consequently  not  determined.  We  shall  call  such  events

indeterminate as to time order.

We must now distinguish between two cases. In the case of Fig. 23, the

time interval EE is coordinated to the event E’, and every event of this time
                12

interval except for the end-points is indeterminate as to time order relative to

E′. The other case would occur if there were no limit to the speed of signals;
                                                              57
then the first-signal would have an infinite velocity  and the time interval

EE would be reduced to a single point E. This point E would then be
1200

coordinated to E′ and be the only event at P indeterminate as to time order

relative to E′.
















          Fig. 23. Events which are indeterminate as to time order.



It is an empirical question which of these two cases occurs in our world.

According to classical physics it is the second case, according to relativistic

physics  the  first.  There  is  decisive  empirical  evidence  for  the  relativistic

theory of time. Light has the limiting velocity; it is physically impossible to

reach higher velocities. Light is therefore a first-signal. For the experimental

basis of this statement see § 32. It is important to note that we are able to

formulate the limiting character of the velocity of light without the concepts

either of velocity or of simultaneity: the departure and return of the first-

signal PP′P are separated at P by a finite interval of time.

This  result  leads  to  a  clarification  of  the  problem  of  simultaneity.  The

definition of simultaneity ascribes equal time values to different points inspace. It must not contradict our definition of time order, which restricts the

time values of E, E’, and E in the sense of (3); therefore, only events which
                  12

are indeterminate as to their time order may be regarded as simultaneous.

Among the events, however, no further rule restricts our choice. We define:

any two events which are indeterminate as to their time order may be called

simultaneous.

This topological definition would be sufficient for a unique definition of

simultaneity  in  the  classical  theory  of  time.  To  each  event E′ at P′ there

corresponds a single event E at P which is indeterminate as to time order, and

this E would then be regarded as simultaneous with E′. In the case of a finite

limiting velocity as in Fig. 23, the topological definition of simultaneity does

not lead to a unique determination, but admits any event E between E and E
                                                                                  12

as  simultaneous  with E’.  The  relativity  of  simultaneity  follows  from  the

topological peculiarity of the causal structure, according to which first-signals

(Fig. 23) determine a finite interval and not a point-event, as corresponding to

a single event E′ located on a different space point.

  These  considerations  supply  the  conceptual  definition  of  simultaneity

which  we  previously  sought  (p.  129).  The  concept simultaneous  is  to  be

reduced to the concept indeterminate as to time order. This result supports

our intuitive understanding of the concept simultaneous. Two simultaneous

events are so situated that a causal chain cannot travel from one to the other

in either direction. Events which occur at this moment in a distant land can no

longer be influenced by us, not even by telegram; and conversely, they can

have no effect on what is happening here at the present moment. Simultaneity

means  the  exclusion  of  causal  connection.  Within  the  frame  of  an

epistemological investigation this result appears justified. Yet we must not

commit the mistake of attempting to derive from it the conclusion that this

definition coordinates to any given event a single event at a given different

place. This would be the case only for a special form of causal structure, a

form that does not correspond to physical reality. The causal structure of our

universe involves the consequence that exclusion of causal connection does,

not lead univocally to a unique simultaneity.

Our epistemological analysis thus leads to the discovery that the relativity

of simultaneity is compatible with the intuitive conception which we connect

with  simultaneity.  It  is  not  this  conception  which  is  incorrect,  but  the

conclusion derived from it that simultaneity must be uniquely determined.Thus all the difficulties which philosophers have seen in the relativity of

simultaneity  are  eliminated.  At  the  same  time  our  result  eliminates  the

mystery with which adherents of the theory of relativity have invested this

concept. There are essentially two errors in relativistic presentations which

have confused the epistemological issues.

One mistake results from the derivation of the relativity of simultaneity

from the different states of motion of various observers. It is true that one can

define  simultaneity  differently  for  different  moving  systems,  which

incidentally is the reason for the simple measuring relations of the Lorentz

transformation, but such a definition is not necessary. We could arrange the

definition of simultaneity of a system K in such a manner that it leads to the

same results as that of another system K′ which is in motion relative to K; in

K, ∈ would not be equal to  in the definition of simultaneity (§ 19), but

would have some other value. It is a serious mistake to believe that if the

state of motion is taken into consideration, the relativity of simultaneity is

necessary. Actually the relativity of simultaneity has nothing to do with the

relativity  of  motion.  It  rests  solely  on  the  existence  of  a  finite  limiting

velocity  for  causal  propagation.  The  arbitrariness  in  the  choice  of

simultaneity makes it possible to assign the value ∈ =  to every uniformly

moving system (or inertial system). A further confusion arises if in addition

to the relativity of motion, the subjectivity of the observer is introduced into

the  argument.  The  relativity  of  simultaneity  has  nothing  to  do  with  the

subjectivity  of  sense  perception.  The  visualization  of  several  logically

equivalent  methods  of  measurement  is  merely  facilitated  when  different

definitions  of  simultaneity  are  ascribed  to  different  observers.  The

multiplicity of observers in the theory of relativity has no further significance.

We are here concerned not with a difference of reference points but with a

difference  in  the  logical  presuppositions  concerning  measurements.  The

comparison  of  time  must  be  defined  in  some  fashion  before  time

measurements are possible at all. That this determination is arbitrary within

certain limits, is due to the causal structure of the world and rests therefore on

empirical grounds.

The other error committed in certain relativistic presentations lies in the

belief that an absolute theory of time is a logically impossible conception.

Such  a  criticism  applies  only  to  the  conceptions  of  absolute  time  usually

presented  by  the  opponents  of  the  theory  of  relativity.  The  followingformulation,  however,  defines  a  meaningful  concept  of  absolute  time:

absolute  time  would  exist  in  a  causal  structure  for  which  the  concept

indeterminate as to time order leads to a unique simultaneity, i.e., for which

there is no finite interval of time between the departure and return of a first-

signal PP′P  at P.  Only  this  precise  formulation  reveals  the  error  in  the

classical theory of time: this property of the causal structure was postulated a

priori, when an empirical investigation was called for. Relativistic physicists

have  indeed  formulated  a  correct  theory  of  time,  but  they  have  left  their

opponents  in  the  dark  concerning  the  epistemological  grounds  of  their

assumptions.


§ 23. UNREAL SEQUENCES

Let us consider one more objection against the theory of time that we have

developed. We have based the relativity of simultaneity on the finiteness of

the velocity of light. Is it not possible, however, to produce arbitrarily high

velocities even if we recognize the limiting character of the velocity of light?

  Consider, for instance, a mechanism of the following kind (Fig. 24). Two

rulers which cross obliquely lie one above the other. If the obliquely drawn

ruler moves in the direction of the arrow, the point of intersection S moves

downward  along  the  edge.  The  smaller  the  angle  between  the  rulers,  the

greater will be its velocity. If they are exactly parallel, the velocity of the

point  of  intersection  becomes  infinite.  Can  we  not  consider  this  point  of

intersection as a moving signal and establish thus the infinite velocity which

we need for the definition of absolute simultaneity? 
            Fig. 24. The moving point of intersection of two rulers.



This question can be answered when we consider our definition of a signal.

The point of intersection cannot transfer a mark. If we add, for instance, to

the  lower  ruler  a  projection V  (indicated  by  dots),  the  signal  would  be

interrupted. On the other hand, the signal arrives unchanged in the lower part

of the ruler. The “signal” consisting of the moving point is therefore not a

real process, and not a signal, strictly speaking; we shall call it an unreal

sequence. Because of its properties it does not define a direction. If we call

the departure of the point of intersection from the upper end E and its arrival
                                                                        1

at the lower end E, we have to order the four combinations (1 and 2, § 21).
                    2

We observe






E\Ey E*E, E\Ep*
                                          (1)



but never






E*Eg*
                                          (2)



In contrast to the order of (1) and (2) in § 21, we find here that E and E
                                                                                  12

appear symmetrically. Consequently, it cannot be determined on the basis of

this phenomenon in which direction the point of intersection travels.

It may be objected that the direction of motion of the point of intersection

can be recognized in a different manner: it depends on the direction in which

the ruler is slanted. This objection overlooks the fact that the slope of the

ruler  cannot  be  determined  directly  since  we  are  dealing  with  a  ruler in

motion. Its slope can be defined only in the sense of the direction of a movingline; for this purpose we project every point of the ruler simultaneously on a

system at rest and measure the slope of the projection. This procedure will be

discussed in detail in § 25. Here we shall say only that the result depends on

the  definition  of  simultaneity.  According  to  one  definition  the  lines  are

parallel and the point of intersection will move infinitely fast; according to

another it will move upward; and according to a third it will move down. The

motion of the point of intersection therefore cannot be used for a definition of

simultaneity.  On  the  contrary,  the  determination  of  the  direction  of  the

motion of the point of intersection demands a prior definition of simultaneity.

The same can be demonstrated for all unreal sequences, many of which can

be constructed. Another example would be the lateral motion of a light-ray

sent out by a quickly rotating searchlight which at a certain distance has a

speed higher than that of light. Although the direction of rotation of the lamp

cannot be inverted because the lamp itself is a physical mechanism, we can

define simultaneity such that outside a certain circle the light travels in a

direction opposite to that of the lamp. For a proof we must refer to a different
            58
publication.

The discussion of unreal sequences shows clearly the significance of the

causal theory of time. Only the events in a real causal process are temporally

ordered;  unreal  sequences  obtain  their  time  order  as  the  result  of  some

method of time comparison which is already defined within the system. With

this distinction, the relativistic theory of time elucidates the phenomenon of

time better than the classical theory.CHAPTER III. SPACE AND TIME









A. The Space-Time Manifold without Gravitational Fields


§ 24. THE PROBLEM OF A COMBINED THEORY OF

SPACE AND TIME

So far we have treated space and time separately. We have described the

specific problems that presented themselves in each of the two types of order,

and have developed the epistemological basis on which we can now construct

a combined theory of space and time. Such a construction must be the final

goal of any epistemological investigation of space and time, since physical

events are ordered in space as well as in time. Hence it is only this combined

order which presents the final solution of the space-time problem. Such a

solution is difficult, because the combination of the two orders introduces

specific problems that do not appear in the study of either of them alone. This

fact justifies the treatment of these problems in a separate chapter on the

combined space-time order.

The  present  investigation  will  lead  us  deeper  into  physics  than  was

necessary in the previous two chapters. We now want to develop the actual

construction  of  the  space-time  metric  as  well  as  the  epistemological

principles on which the space-time theory is based. This presentation will

lead us a step beyond the epistemological framework of this book, since such

a  construction  is  actually  the  task  of  physics,  which  uses  the  metric

constantly.  The  step  will  appear  advisable  when  one  considers  how  little

attention physicists have paid to the epistemological aspects of this problem.Presentations of the space-time theory by physicists are concerned primarily

with physical issues and fail to make the epistemological problems explicit.

On the contrary, they are often epistemologically vague, in order to make the

physical  theory  appear  as  plausible  as  possible.  In  this  chapter  we  shall

present the physical theory of space and time including certain aspects of the

theory of gravitation. We may defend this procedure on the grounds that the

drawing of sharp boundaries between the various sciences is detrimental to

their  epistemological  clarification.  A  philosopher  constantly  afraid  of

stepping into another domain runs the danger of asserting empty generalities,

because his philosophy is not sufficiently anchored in the specific sciences. It

would be rewarding if the present epistemological study should also help to

clarify some problems for the physicist.

We shall devote Part A to problems connected with the special theory of

relativity.  We  shall,  however,  treat  only  the  theory  of  space  and  time

developed  by  the  theory  of  relativity,  omitting  related  problems,  e.g.,  of

electrodynamics, which fall outside the frame of our investigation. We shall

always keep epistemological interests in the foreground; yet we need to show

what physical considerations pertaining to space and time are presented in the

special theory of relativity, and how these considerations provide physical

content for the epistemological frame developed in the foregoing chapters.

The restriction to gravitation-free spaces, necessary for the special theory

of relativity, finds its historical origin in the Newtonian principle of relativity

which introduced the uniformly moving inertial system as the normal system.

For Newton the problems of gravitation begin with acceleration. This far-

reaching idea was adopted by Einstein with certain reservations, to the extent

that uniformly moving systems occupy a central position in his theory. He

carried the Newtonian relativity a step further with his principle of relativity,

which excludes axiomatically the possibility of assigning a preferred position

to any single system within this class. According to Newton it is only within

mechanics that no distinction between inertial systems can be made. When

Newton believed, in addition, that even the motion of light does not furnish a

distinction, he could do so only because he considered light as the emission

of  small  particles,  i.e.,  as  a  mechanical  process.  But  in  view  of  further

developments in optics which led to the wave theory of light and with it to

the ether as medium of the waves, one of the inertial systems must be singled

out by the motion of light as the system at rest relative to the ether. SinceEinstein did not draw this conclusion in spite of the wave theory of light, he

has extended the Newtonian relativity to the field of optics.

  Today even this form of relativity theory has become a special case in the

framework  of  Einstein’s  general  theory  of  relativity,  which  includes  the

phenomena of gravitation. According to this theory a metrical field pervades

the entire space and in general does not satisfy the conditions of the special

theory  of  relativity.  Only  in  special  cases,  for  instance  in  the  vast  empty

spaces  between  the  fixed  stars,  does  the  metrical  inertial  field  permit  the

construction  of  inertial  systems  of  greater  extension.  This  far-reaching

consideration  leads  to  a  complete  clarification  of  the  special  theory  of

relativity and explains what determines the unique state of motion of the

inertial systems. We shall present these ideas in Part B and content ourselves

in Part A with the axiomatic supposition that there are spaces, or parts of

space, to which the special theory of relativity can be applied, and that in

these spaces a certain state of motion can be distinguished as uniform. It will

be our task to show how this particular state of motion can be recognized and

determined  by  certain  physical  phenomena.  This  approach  is  advisable

because, as we shall show in Part B, it can be extended to spaces that contain

gravitation provided that we restrict ourselves to infinitesimal regions, and

because it supplies in this form the foundation also for the general theory of

relativity. The state of motion, as well as a detailed construction of the space-

time metric, will be the subject matter of our presentation.

We must begin this analysis, however, with a preliminary investigation. In

the preceding chapter we developed the relativity of simultaneity; and before

we begin with the metrical construction, we must clarify the consequences of

this relativity for the measurement of space. It is here that we shall find the

new  ideas  which  the  epistemological  analysis  of  the  concept  of  time  has

introduced into the combined theory of space and time.


§ 25. THE DEPENDENCE OF SPATIAL MEASUREMENT

ON THE DEFINITION OF SIMULTANEITY

The fact that the definition of simultaneity can be arbitrarily chosen leads

to consequences for the measurement of space which become apparent when

systems moving with different velocities are considered.

Our  previous  conception  of  the  measurement  of  spatial  distances  wasbased on the transport of measuring rods; the value obtained by successively

marking off the measuring rod along the segment is its length. However, this

definition of length is applicable only if the measuring rod is at rest relative

to  the  segment.  Although  the  measuring  rod  is  moved  when  it  is  placed

repeatedly  along  the  segment,  it  is  at  rest  relative  to  the  segment  at  the

particular moment when it is marked off, i.e., at the moment when it fulfills

its metrical function. The length obtained in this fashion is commonly called

the rest-length; it is the length of a segment measured with a measuring rod

relative to which it is at rest.

First we find that there exists an ambiguity in the comparison of the rest-

length  of  measuring  rods  moved  with  different  velocities.  If  we  carry  a

measuring rod into a system in a different state of motion, it is impossible to

compare it in the described manner with a measuring rod at rest; therefore, a

coordinative definition must be introduced. We say that the measuring rod is

to be regarded as having the same length whether at rest or in motion. This

determination has nothing to do with simultaneity; and we shall call it the

first comparison of length in kinematics.

We must next lay down a rule which we shall call the second comparison

of length in kinematics, and which deals with the question of the length of a

moving line-segment. This problem appears when all lengths are referred to a

single  coordinate  system K  (Fig.  25),  which  may  be  conceived  as  a

framework of rigid rods. We may then perform measurements only with rods

which are at rest relative to the coordinate system. How can we determine,

under these circumstances, ′the length of a segment A′B′ which is moving in

the direction of the arrow? If we were to mark it off with the measuring rod,

this would give us the rest-length in K′, not its length as measured in K.









                  Fig. 25. The length of a moving line-segment.



This measurement must therefore be made by some indirect method whichincludes time measurements. Let us suppose that a definition of simultaneity

has been given for K and that at a given instant, defined for K, we mark on

the axis of K those points which coincide with the endpoints A′ and B′ of the

moving segment. The moving segment is thus projected on the system K and

the length of the projection AB can now be determined by a measuring rod

which is at rest in K. We shall call the rest-length of AB the length of the

moving segment A′B′ measured in K.

How do we know that this method is correct? This question is meaningless,

since we are again concerned with a definition. What is meant by the length

of a moving segment? In classical kinematics it was never noticed that such a

concept had to be introduced, because the usual method determines only the

rest-length  of  a  segment.  The  length  of  a  moving  segment  was  tacitly

assumed to be identical with its length at rest. We can see, however, that in

this manner only the rest-length of a moving segment is defined analogous to

the rest-length of a segment at rest. On the other hand, the measurement of a

segment  with  a  measuring  rod  that moves  relative  to  it  requires  the

formulation of a new concept. This formulation is a matter of definition. We

shall choose this definition in such a manner that it leads to a reasonable

extension of the concept of length. This definition reads: The length of a

moving line-segment is the distance between simultaneous positions of its

endpoints.

The technique of extending a concept which we have used here can be

illustrated by an elementary example. It corresponds to the introduction in

vector analysis of the concept of the geometrical sum (vector sum) of two

segments.  The  concept  of  the  sum  of  two  segments  is  first  defined  for

segments lying in the same direction, i.e., as their algebraic sum. In Fig. 26

the sum of the segments AB and BC is given by the distance AC, but we do

not know how to compute the sum of the segments AB and BD, unless we

introduce a new definition. It would be wrong to assume that this sum is

given  by  the  rotation  of BD  into  the  position BC  and  by  addition  in  the

previous sense, i.e., by AC. This statement does not follow from the earlier

definition, but represents a new definition which we shall call the scalar sum.

We could just as well have given the new definition differently and specified

the distance AD as the sum of the two segments AB and BD. This new sum is

the geometrical  sum.  Is  this  new  definition  correct?  The  question  is  not

reasonable, because the new definition does not follow from the old one andis therefore arbitrary. There is only one restriction which we shall impose,

namely,  that  the  new  definition,  which  is  more  general  than  the  old  one,

should coincide with it in those special cases where the old definition applies.

This condition is satisfied by the geometrical sum, because it yields AC as the

sum of AB and BC. The new definition is therefore a consistent extension of

the old one. This condition, of course, is also satisfied by the scalar sum. The

principle that such extensions must be consistent with existing definitions

therefore does not lead to uniquely determined concepts, but leaves them

arbitrary within certain limits. The choice of the geometrical sum instead of

the  scalar  sum  in  vector  analysis  is  based  on  other  considerations.  The

geometrical sum yields different results for the additions AB+BD and AB+BE,

namely the distances AD and AE, whereas the scalar sum yields the same

results in each case, namely AC. Hence the advantage of the first concept

consists in its greater usefulness and has nothing to do with truth.











  Fig. 26. The geometrical sum of two line-segments as an example of the

                                extension of a concept.



The same method of extension is used in the formulation of the concept of

the length of a moving segment, where a concept is developed for a case not

considered in classical kinematics. Again the rule of consistent extension is

satisfied, since the length of the moving segment becomes identical with the

rest-length in the case where it is at rest. The new concept therefore satisfies

the only condition that can be imposed under these circumstances. Since this

condition does not prescribe a unique extension, we cannot say that the new

concept is true. It is useful, and may be considered a meaningful extension of

the concept of length; this is all that can be required.

It can easily be shown that the length of the moving segment, as we have

defined it, will depend upon the definition of simultaneity. Imagine that thesegment is in a given state of motion relative to the coordinate system; then

the length of the projection depends on the definition of simultaneity used in

K. If the definition of simultaneity were changed, the length of the moving

segment would also change. Assume that the projection of A′ occurs at the
                                                                        59
same time as before, but the projection of B′ a little later. B′ will have

moved slightly to the right and B will be farther to the right; AB therefore

becomes longer. Suppose now that simultaneity has been redefined to make

the instants of the two projections simultaneous; then the new distance AB

yields the length of the moving segment A′B′. This length is now greater than

it was according to the first definition of simultaneity, and the measurements

of space are therefore dependent on measurements of time.

We can also show that the length of a moving segment depends on its

velocity. Assume that the simultaneity-projection is made of a rod moving

with the velocity ν relative to a system K in which simultaneity is defined

according to Einstein’s definition (1, § 19). Subsequently the rod is brought

into the system K and placed next to the projection. Will it now coincide with

the projection? To say that it does is not an a priori assertion, but a physical

hypothesis that must be tested by experience. The theory of relativity denies

this hypothesis; it maintains that the projection is shorter than the rest-length,

and that this difference becomes greater with increasing values of ν. This

result cannot be justified now, but we can understand intuitively that it is

possible; it expresses a property of rigid rods. We also recognize that the

opposite assertion is likewise merely a hypothesis. In § 22 we formulated an

absolute  theory  of  time  and  showed  that  there  would  be  an  absolute

simultaneity if signal velocities were unlimited. Even in this case it would

constitute an additional hypothesis to assume that the projection of a moving

rod,  based  on  this  simultaneity,  equals  its  rest-length. It  follows  from  the

nature of the extended concept of length that the length of a moving segment

is generally different from its rest-length.

  Even  this  simple  logical  fact  has  led  to  considerations  that  raise  the

question of truth in the wrong place. It has been asked: which is the “true

length” of the rod, its rest-length or its length when in motion? Evidently this

question is unreasonable. Is the algebraic sum a “truer sum” than the vector

sum? This is nonsense. The length of a moving rod is conceptually different

from  the  length  of  a  rod  at  rest  and  will  therefore  in  most  cases  have  a

different measure. At most, one could ask whether there might be a greatestor smallest length of the rod. According to the Lorentz transformation, the

rest-length is the greatest length. It is not the true length of the rod but merely

its  true  rest-length.  A  different  measure  represents  the  true  length  of  the

moving rod. The concept of truth does not enter into the comparison of these

two types of length. Let us consider, as an example of these logical relations,

a rod AB viewed from a point P (Fig. 27); it then subtends an angle α. The
                                    11

size of this angle changes when the point P travels along the horizontal, and
                                                  i

has a smaller value α at the point P. Which of these angles is the true visual
                        22

angle? Again this question is unreasonable. A visual angle α is defined only
                                                                        i

for a given distance PP and there can be a true visual angle only for such
                        0i

and  such  a  distance.  There  is  also  a  largest  subtended  angle  when P
                                                                                          i

coincides with P and α = α = 180°. This however, is not the true, but the
                  0i0

largest subtended angle; or, if we wish to characterize it by another property,

it is the subtended angle for the distance zero. The extended concept of length

that we have introduced has exactly the same logical structure. The length of

a moving segment corresponds to the visual angle. It depends on the state of

motion, just as the visual angle depends on the distance. The rest-length of

the rod is its length at velocity zero, just as α is the visual angle at distance
                                                      0

zero. Both are maximum values.










 
      Fig. 27. The visual angle as an example of a relative magnitude.



  There is an inessential difference between the two, viz., that the length of

the moving segment depends not on one but on two parameters, on the state

of motion of the segment and on the definition of simultaneity. If we call the

length of the moving segment l, then l is a function of ν and s, where ν is the

velocity and s symbolizes the definition of simultaneity. Thus we may write1=1v,s)
                                          (1)



This functional relation has the peculiarity that for ν = 0 the function becomes

independent of s, and






 

ly = constant
                                          (2)



Indeed, if ν = 0, the projection of B′ (Fig. 25) upon K at a later time. is still B

and the definition of simultaneity no longer has any influence

For this reason the rest-length of a body can be defined without reference

to simultaneity. After we have introduced the extended concept of length

which contains the concept of simultaneity, the special case of the rest-length

must, strictly speaking, also contain the concept of simultaneity. The rest-

length  must  therefore  also  be  defined  as  the  distance  between  the

simultaneous positions of the endpoints. The resulting value, however, does

not depend on the definition of simultaneity; every definition of simultaneity

gives the same result for the rest-length and we can thus omit this addition in

the definition of rest-length.

A rigorous analysis of these considerations leads to a correction of the rule

of consistency for extended concepts used frequently in mathematics. One

cannot say that, in the special case, the wider concept becomes identical with

the  narrower  concept,  but  only  that  it yields  the  same  result.  It  makes  a

difference whether we specialize a concept by giving one of the variables a

special  value,  or  whether  the  dependence  on  this  variable  is  not  even

contained in the definition. Thus l(ν, s) is not identical with l, but leads to
                                            ν—00

the same distance in the coordinate system. Similarly we must not say that

the concept of the geometrical sum is identical with that of the algebraic sum

for equidirected distances; it simply leads to the same numerical result. 

                                                                      60
  Relation (1) formulates the famous assertion by Einstein  that the length

of a rod depends on its velocity and on the chosen definition of simultaneity.

There is nothing mysterious in this relation, for it is based on the fact that we

do not measure the moving rod, but its projection on a system at rest. How

the length of this projection depends on the definition of simultaneity can

best be illustrated by reference to a photograph taken through a focal-plane

shutter. Such a shutter, which is necessary for very short exposures, is not

located between the lenses, but immediately in front of the film. It consists of

a wide band with a horizontal slit, which slides down vertically. Different

bands  of  the  image  are  photographed  successively  on  the  film.  Moving

objects are therefore strangely distorted; the wheels of a rapidly moving car,

for instance, appear to be slanted. The shape of the objects in the picture will

evidently  depend  on  the  speed  of  the  shutter.  Similarly  the  length  of  the

moving segment depends on the definition of simultaneity. One definition of

simultaneity differs from another because events that are simultaneous for

one  definition  occur  successively  for  another  one.  What  may  be  a

simultaneity projection of a moving segment for one definition is a “focal-

plane shutter photograph” for the other. A picture obtained by means of the

first definition therefore appears distorted according to the second definition.

The comparison with the focal-plane shutter makes this distinction clear, with

the only difference that the focal-plane shutter operates much more slowly. It

is a physical mechanism functioning at a speed below that of light, whereas

the events of the projection form an unreal sequence with speeds above the

velocity of light. (Cf. § 23). This difference is not important, however, for the

qualitative description, and the changes in the length of moving rods can

easily be visualized.

We emphasize this manner of visualizing the relation between space and

time measurements because many presentations describe this relation in a

misleading way. These presentations are based on the remark by Minkowski
61
: “From now on the ideas of space and time as independent concepts shall

disappear and only a union of the two shall be retained as an independent

concept.” It is true that we may speak of a union of space and time in the

relativistic theory of space and time. We shall discuss this idea in detail in §

29, p. 188. The first part of Minkowski’s remark has unfortunately caused the

erroneous impression that all visualizations of time as time and of space asspace must disappear. The relativity of simultaneity does indeed lead to the

coupling of space and time measurements and brings about a union of space

and time, but this statement says no more than was expressed with the aid of

the concept of the simultaneity projection and illustrated by reference to the

focal-plane shutter. To make the union of space and time more apparent, we

can use the following example. Let us consider a space filled with moving

mass points, e.g., a gas the molecules of which are whirling about. At a given

time  each  molecule  will  have  a  definite  position.  If  we  now  change  the

definition of simultaneity, we shall obtain the same position for some of the

molecules, but not for others; this distribution is now a “focal-plane shutter

photograph.” The state of a space at a given time is therefore not determined

in  an  absolute  sense,  but  depends  on  the  definition  of  simultaneity.  This

situation  can  be  visualized  completely  and  represents  everything  that  is

asserted by the relativity of simultaneity about the union of space and time.

The importance of the effect of the definition of simultaneity emerges even

more  clearly  when  we  consider  not  only  the  length  of  a  segment  or  the

position of a point but also the shape of a moving object. Since the shape is

determined by the simultaneous projection of all the points, it will evidently

depend on the velocity of the object and on the definition of simultaneity.

According to the Lorentz-Einstein assumptions, a moving circle assumes the

shape of an ellipse, the minor axis of which lies in the direction of motion.

This ellipse results from the fact that the Lorentz transformation calls for a

contraction only in the dimension of the rod parallel to the line of motion.

Such a deformation is not unintelligible; it merely shows that the simultaneity

projection of the points of a moving circle has the shape of an ellipse in the

coordinate  system  at  rest.  The  idea  of  the  focal-plane  shutter  photograph

elucidates this assertion.

  With this analysis all difficulties disappear that are intuitively anticipated

with respect to the relativity of simultaneity and the distortion of moving

bodies.  One  must  only  keep  in  mind  that  simultaneity  is  a  matter  of

definition. Whether we are to associate the time order of distant events with

the idea of the “ click-click ” of the focal-plane shutter or with the notion of

the “tick” of a clock, is not determined by the events themselves. Both ideas

apply directly only to experiences; the “click-click” is the experience of a

sequence  and  the  “tick”  an  instantaneous  experience.  We  actually  never

experience distant events, but only the effects that reach us. Consequently wecan choose how to coordinate these events to our visual images.


§ 26. CONSEQUENCES FOR A CENTRO-SYMMETRICAL

PROCESS OF PROPAGATION

The dependence of spatial measurements on the definition of simultaneity

has a peculiar consequence for processes of propagation such as light and

sound waves, that travel from one center in all directions. It turns out that the

shape of a single impulse depends on the definition of simultaneity in such a

way that it is impossible to recognize the point from which the impulse has

originated. For the sake of simplicity we shall speak in the following only of

the motion of light. Similar arguments apply, however, to sound and any

other centro-symmetrical process of propagation. In this analysis, the nature

of the wave is not important—only the fact that it progresses in time.

Let us consider (Fig. 28) a single impulse of light produced at A at the time

t  =  0.  What  shape  does  it  have  at  time t?  The  answer  depends  on  the
12

definition of simultaneity. Let us first use the expression (1, § 19) and set ∈

equal to  in






t2 =htelta—t) O0<e<l1
                                          (1)



We then put a clock at every space point, synchronizing all clocks from A

according  to  this  definition.  Let  us  now  imagine  that  all  those  points  are

marked that the light impulse has reached when their clocks show the time t;
                                                                                          2

they are located on a circle around A. The solid circles in Fig. 28 thus indicate

the position of the light impulse at different times t. The figure is drawn only
                                                          2

for a plane, and the circles are to be understood as cross-sections of spheres.

The light is propagated in spherical surfaces around A. 
Fig. 28. Redefinition of a single light impulse from a centro-symmetric to an

                        eccentric process of propagation.



We shall now choose a different definition of simultaneity. We leave the

clock at A unchanged, but avail ourselves of the choice which we have in

setting the other clocks. We again use the expression (1) but let the factor ∈

be different from  and make it dependent on the direction; we choose








<

~ 2acos p+Ver—aZsin’f)

 
                                          (2)



We set all our clocks from A according to this rule, and therefore the factor

∈ will be constant along every ray r. However, ∈ depends on the direction

φ of the ray; the numerical value of ∈ is given by (2). In this formula a is an

arbitrary constant and c is the numerical value of the velocity of light which

was obtained by means of the first definition of simultaneity. The additional

restriction on ∈ in (1) means only a limitation of the values of a, which can

easily be fulfilled. Substituting (2) in (1), we have an admissible definition of

simultaneity.Let  us  call  the  newly  defined  time t′;  the  moment  at  which  the  light

impulse departs from A is again t′ = 0. What is the location of the light
                                        1

impulse at time t′? If we let r be the length of the ray measured at the time t′
                  22

and if we then reflect the ray at the endpoint B of the ray r, it will return to A


at a time t′; we then have t′ = t′—t′ = .
2r
          3331

This measurement, which is made at A, does not require the t′-time and can

therefore take the place of the expression obtained through the first definition

of time. The arrival of the ray at B is now calculated from (1) and (2) as








2r r

t'y =t14e(t's—1'1) = el’s AT

   
                                          (3)



The position of the light impulse at the time t′ is the curve given by this
                                                        2

equation if we consider t′ as constant. With the substitutions
                            2







aty=e x
=% oy
croR s$=; r=atty

 
                                          (4)



of  which  the  first  two  are  abbreviations  and  the  other  two  represent  the

change from polar to rectangular coordinates, (3) can now be written as:






(x—
€)2+y2 =
=R?
                                          (5)The location of the light impulse at the time t′ is again along a circle, but the
                                                    2

center of this circle is displaced by the distance e = at′ along the horizontal
                                                                2

from A.  The  family  of  circles  which  result  for  increasing  values  of t′ is
                                                                                      2

indicated by the dotted circles in Fig. 28. The center of these circles is not

stationary but moves to the right with the velocity a, while their respective

radii R increase with the velocity c. For three-dimensional processes, these

circles likewise should be regarded as the cross-sections of spheres.

The following results obtain. The surfaces of the propagation of a light

impulse do not define a center. Depending on the definition of simultaneity,

either the stationary point A, or a point that moves uniformly relative to A

with the velocity a, can be regarded as the center of the light impulse. In

either case the velocity of light equals c. This result is the basis of Einstein’s

principle of the constancy of the velocity of light; the motion of light can be

considered as a spherical wave for any uniformly moving system.

 

A further explanation is required. What we have proved applies only to

single impulses of light; only in this case is no center defined. However, a

continuous source of light would define a center. If this constant source of

light rested at A, the surfaces of propagation of the various light impulses

would be the solid-line circles of Fig. 28, according to the first definition of

simultaneity. The second definition, however, would give us not the family of

dotted circles, but a system of such families of circles. These circles could

then no longer be regarded as having one moving center, but each individual

impulse would have its own center which is traveling to the right and is at A

at  the  particular  time  when  the  impulse  is  sent.  Each  individual  impulse

would then have surfaces of propagation which, with increasing time, would

be of the type of the dotted circles of Fig. 28. Consequently the state of

motion of A could here be determined. Fig. 28 must therefore be conceived as

representing a single impulse of light at different times, not as representing a

periodic sequence of light impulses at the same time. This characterization of

the state of motion of a constant source of light corresponds entirely to the

conceptions of the theory of relativity. It is possible to identify by the type of

propagation of light the system relative to which a constant source of light is

at rest, for instance, by the Doppler effect which appears for another system

and is quantitatively different at opposite sides of the source of light. The

principle of the constancy of the velocity of light maintains only that thecontinuous  motion  of  light  has  the  form  of  a  concentric  spherical  wave

relative to that coordinate system in which the source of light is at rest. In the
                                                        2
language of Minkowski: every cone of light ds = 0 has a vertex; the line

connecting the vertices of a number of such cones is the world-line of a point

in a certain state of motion. The theory of relativity agrees with the classical

theories  in  the  statement  that  the  constant  source  defines  a  center  for  all

impulses. Relativity theory adds only that the propagations of all the impulses

can be considered as spherical, measured from the system in which the source

is at rest, provided that the definition of simultaneity is adjusted to the state of

motion of the source of light.

It should be noted that the time transformation given in (2), which can also

be expressed as







= v c—acos $—Vci—a?sin’p
S G s g ViA—atsin®p

 

 
is  not  the  Lorentz  transformation.  For  the  Lorentz  transformation  spatial

measurements  are  also  changed,  because  they  are  obtained  relative  to  a

moving system. In our example only the time was transformed, while the

distances between points at rest remained the same; the spatial coordinates,

therefore, retain their identity.

 

Our presentation enables us to visualize Einstein’s result. The shape of the

surface  of  the  light  wave  is  not  uniquely  determined  but  depends  on  the

definition  of  simultaneity.  Its  so-called  shape  is  always  the  simultaneity

projection of the moving light impulse on a coordinate system. If we choose

the first definition of simultaneity, we obtain the solid-line circles of Fig. 28.

But if we imagine a focal-plane shutter photograph of these circles, where the

focal-plane shutter moves from left to right, the dotted circles will result. This

can easily be visualized, The farther the focal-plane shutter moves to the

right,  the  later  it  will  catch  the  light  surface,  and  the  dotted  circles  are

therefore shifted to the right. Nevertheless it is not permissible to say that the

second definition of simultaneity is false. The dotted circles appear like a

focal-plane shutter photograph only relative to the first definition. Relative to

the second definition all the projected events are simultaneous, and the solid-line circles form the picture of a focal-plane shutter photograph, produced by

a  focal-plane  shutter  which  runs  from  right  to  left.  This  can  also  be

visualized;  for  this  purpose  one  must  begin  the  analysis  with  the  dotted

circles.


§ 27. THE CONSTRUCTION OF THE SPACE-TIME

METRIC

  After these preliminary investigations concerning the connection between

the definition of simultaneity and measurements of space. we now turn to the

central  problem  of  the  physical  theory  of  space  and  time,  namely  the

complete  construction  of  the  space-time  metric.  We  shall  relate  this

construction  to  the  causal  theory  of  time  which  previously  provided  the

definitions of time order and of time comparison (§ 21, § 22), and we shall

show how metrical definitions can be added to these topological coordinative

definitions in such a way that a physical space-time geometry results that is

based  entirely  on  the  concept  of  the  causal  chain.  We  shall  carefully

distinguish between empirical statements and definitions and show to which

statements of the relativistic theory of space and time these two categories

apply. As before, the empirical statements are called “axioms” because they
                                                                                62
play the role of logical premises in the system of space-time theory.

Let us imagine that numerous mass points are whirling about at random in

empty space. On each of these points there is an observer and these observers

can communicate with each other by signals. With the aid of these signals

they now want to establish a space-time order.

For  their  measurements,  the  observers  will  use first-signals,  i.e.,  light

signals, because a time order constructed in this manner has the advantage

that it cannot violate the relations earlier and later for other signals, since

other  signals  are  slower.  The  observers  now  have  the  task  of  choosing  a

system of points that can be called “at rest relative to each other” in order to

define a space-time metric in this “rigid system.” The choice of such a rigid

system  is  again  arbitrary  and  the  state  of  relative  rest  is  a  matter  of  a

coordinative  definition.  However,  one  definition  is  distinguished  by  its

simplicity and leads to Newton’s inertial system. That there exists such a

definition is a matter of fact and can be either true or false. We must therefore

state  the  basic  empirical  facts  in  the  form  of  axioms.  These  axioms  are

satisfied, not under all conditions, but only in gravitation-free spaces. On theother  hand,  the  applicability  of  these  axioms  provides  a  criterion  for

gravitation-free  spaces.  It  is  thus  not  necessary  to  emphasize  that  our

presentation is restricted to gravitation-free spaces. This restriction is implied

when the validity of the axioms is assumed.

The construction of the rigid system, or system of points at relative rest, is

accomplished by steps which we shall describe in terms of certain operations

performed by the observers on the various points. The observer at A knows

what is meant by “temporal order at A", but he does not know as yet what is

meant by “two equal successive time intervals.” Provisionally, he lays down

a completely arbitrary rule; i.e., he chooses a measure of time that differs by
                                              63
some monotonically increasing function  from the “ uniform time” which is

to be defined later.

He now tries to reach by signal a point B which has the property that the
                                        64
time interval ABA of a light signal  reflected at B will always have the same

length when measured repeatedly at A in the arbitrarily chosen metric. ABA is

therefore constant. To make this possible the point B must have a specific

state of motion relative to A, which depends on the time metric chosen in A.

Using this method, the observer at A looks for a number of such points B, C,

... which form a “system related to A."

The observer at A can now transfer his time measure to the other points B,

C, . . . , for example, by giving a time signal every “second.” The observers at

B, C, ... simply consider as equal those time intervals marked off by the

arrival of the time signals from A. (This procedure does not yet require a

definition of simultaneity.) These time intervals need not be equal to those at

A in the ordinary sense, since nothing has been specified so far about the state

of motion of B, C, ... relative to A. We merely give provisional definitions.

The observers at B, C, . . . now make the following experiment. They

measure whether the light signals BAB, BCB, CAC, etc., furnish also  =

constant,  = constant,  = constant, etc., when they use for their time

measurements the time scale previously supplied by A. Generally they will

find that this is not the case. Even if they should not use the metric supplied

by A, there would not be a metric in B which for all points yields  =

constant,  = constant, etc. In other words: The “system related to A” is

BCB
not a “system related to B.”

Let us use this idea in order to combine a selection of points into a specialsystem. For this purpose, we demand that a system S of points be chosen in

such a way that this system is, for each of its points, a related system. That

such a system exists is an empirical fact (Axiom IV, 1); that we select this

system among all others represents an arbitrary definition.

  Using the points of the system S obtained in this manner we now perform

the following experiment. We send one light signal along the triangular path

ABCA, another in the opposite direction along ACBA, and test whether the

time interval  equals the time interval . Again, we do not yet

ABCA
employ  the  concept  of  simultaneity  for  distant  points.  We  send  the  two

signals simultaneously from A and observe whether or not they return to A at

the same time. Generally this condition will not be satisfied for an arbitrary

system S. Therefore we add a further restriction if we demand that a system S′

is to be chosen among the systems S which satisfies the round-trip axiom.

That such a system S′ exists is again a matter of experience. (Axiom IV, 2).

So far we have not made use of the time comparison between the moving

mass  points,  but  it  would  have  been  possible  to  do  so  by  means  of  the

definition (2, § 19)








btelts—t) O0<e<l1

 
                                                                                        (1)




since this definition contains no presupposition regarding the relative state of

motion  of  these  points.  We  have  only  to  imagine  that  the  clock  at B  is

continually  set  relative  to  the  clock  at A,  for  we  cannot  construct  a

mechanism at B which, due to the arbitrariness of the time metric at A and the

arbitrariness of the relative state of motion of A and B, will permanently

maintain the once-established simultaneity. This conception does not involve

any difficulties, and the resulting simultaneity will always satisfy the basic

topological requirement that it connect only events which are indeterminate
                  65
as to time order,

  Having  made  a  choice  among  the  mass  points  and  having  combined  asystem S′ of these points into a spatial coordinate system, we can now ask

whether  a  special  simultaneity  can  be  defined  for  this  system.  This

simultaneity  definition  is  given  by  setting ∈  equal  to   .  Its  advantages

consist in the following properties:

 

1. If a clock at B is set from A according to (1) and ∈ =  , and if we then

    set the clock at A from B, using the same rule, the two times agree. (The

    synchronization is symmetric.)

2. If two clocks at B and at C are set from A according to (1) and ∈ =  ,

    and if the two clocks are compared directly with each other by the same

    rule, they will be found to agree. (The synchronization is transitive.)


  These properties are by no means self-evident; they require the assumption

of the previously mentioned light-axioms, which apply in S′. These properties

make the time order in S′ particularly simple and justify the definition of

simultaneity used by Einstein in the special theory of relativity where ∈ =  .

This should not mislead us into believing that this definition is “more true”

because  of  its  simplicity.  Again  we  are  concerned  with  nothing  but

descriptive  simplicity.  The  choice  of  a  more  complicated  definition  of

simultaneity does not present any difficulties for our imagination. One should

not  confuse  here  “transitivity  of  simultaneity”  with  “transitivity  of

simultaneity according to the same rule of synchronization.” The first applies

always,  once  a  simultaneity  has  been  uniquely  defined  for one  clock

according to (1). For the comparison of any given clocks a special value of

∈, which may vary with time, will have to be chosen. The second kind of

transitivity depends on certain physical conditions. Even if these are satisfied,

we are not compelled to carry through this simple kind of simultaneity.

In addition to the simplicity of their time order, the systems S′ possess a

second important property: they permit us to make spatial measurements.

This  fact  is  of  extraordinary  significance  because  it  proves  that  space

measurements  are  reducible  to  time  measurements. Time  is  therefore

logically prior to space.

First  we  shall  define  an  important  topological  concept  of  spatial  order,

namely  the  concept between.  We  treated  the  same  concept  in  §  14  and

showed there that the logical significance of this concept can be determined

by an implicit definition. Here we have to achieve more: we have to discoverphysical relationships that can be coordinated to the concept between and

thereby permit an application of this logical concept to physical reality. As

we have explained in §§ 14 - 15, the logical concept does not prescribe any

particular application. We shall here consider that application which leads to

physical geometry. Therefore we must now give the coordinative definition

of  the  concept  between.  Surprisingly  enough  this  definition  can  be  given

solely in terms of temporal concepts. The topological neighborhood relations

of  space  are  therefore  reduced  to  temporal  relations  and  thus  to  causal

relations.

  Definition e. A point B lies between A and C, if the first-signal ABC arrives

at C at the same time as the first-signal AC. (In short, if  .)

If  this  definition  is  not  to  contradict  the  purely  mathematico-logical

significance of the concept between, the following empirical rule must be

added:

  Axiom G. If for two points B and B it is true that  as well as
                                    12

that  then either  or  = 

 
B1B,C
  Having determined the concept between, we can now take a further step

toward spatial measurements and define the concept straight line, which is a

metrical concept. In this case we shall not employ the method of implicit

definition used in § 14, but another logically permissible method, deriving the

concept straight line from the concept between and the basic logical concept

of a set.

  Definition f. The straight line through A and C is the set of those points

which among themselves satisfy the relation between and which include the

two points A and C.

It must be shown that the straight line determined by this coordinative

definition agrees with the geometrical concept of straight line, e.g., that the

straight line from A to B is identical with the straight line from B to A, etc.

This proof is possible on the basis of the axioms given thus far.

We  shall  now  define  the  metric  in  its  physical  sense  by  giving  the

coordinative definition of spatial congruence:

  Definition 10. If the time interval  , then the spatial distance

 
AB is equal to the spatial distance AC. (See Fig. 29.) 
      Fig. 29. Definition of the equality of spatial distances in terms of

                          measurements of time intervals.



  These are all the definitions required for a geometry of space. We can

answer any question of a geometrical nature by using time measurements

exclusively.  We  even  gave  overdeterminations  and  must  now  prove  the

consistency of our system, which is easily done. It can readily be shown that

the straight line of definition ƒ is also the shortest line in the sense of the

metric of definition 10.

Let us imagine ourselves in one of the systems S′ in which we intend to

carry out measurements. Specifically, we are interested in determining the

geometry of S′. Once a definition of congruence is given, the choice of the

geometry is no longer in our hands; rather, the geometry is now an empirical

fact.

If we were to measure the circumference and diameter of a circle, would

their ratio equal π? In general the geometry will not be Euclidean. But we can

select certain systems S" from the systems S′, if we demand that the selected

systems satisfy the condition that the defined geometry be Euclidean. It is

again an empirical fact that there are such systems S" (Axiom V), whereas

their selection is based on a definition.

Now we have reached an important goal: we have defined in each system

of the class S" a complete and unique metric without the use of rigid bodies

or natural clocks. Light signals alone provide the metrical structure of the

four-dimensional space-time continuum. This construction may be called a

light-geometry.  Its  applicability  depends  on  the  truth  of  the  previously

mentioned axioms which refer only to light signals and mass points and are

therefore called light-axioms.On the other hand, a second goal has not yet been attained. We have not

yet sufficiently restricted the class S" of systems to make it identical with the

class of Newtonian inertial systems I. The class S" is still too general and

contains other systems beside I. A further explanation is required. We started

with freely moving individual mass points and constructed from them a point

system K by placing certain restrictions upon the results of measurements

performed by light signals. It can now be shown that there is not one, but

there are many systems that satisfy these requirements; they form the class S"

It is not our purpose to define a class containing exactly one system, since the

Newtonian inertial systems form a class I of systems that move uniformly

relative  to  each  other.  It  is  the  goal  of  our  construction  to  arrive  at  this

particular class I, i.e., to determine with the aid of light signals not only the

geometry within a given system of points, but to establish at the same time a

choice among the many point systems, such that only systems in a particular

state of motion satisfy our requirements. We thus want to specify the state of

motion in space, taking the motion of light as the physical “framework” to

which the systems are “tied.” The motion of light is too loose a framework,

however, to determine the state of motion sufficiently to make it identical

with that of the inertial systems. We obtain a more general class S" which

contains  the  inertial  systems  as  a  proper  subclass.  Yet  a  considerable

restriction  has  already  been  imposed  on  the  totality  of  possible  states  of

motion, and a method has been indicated by which a state of motion can be

defined  in  free  space,  provided  that  there  exists  a  physical  process,

independent of the procedure of measurement, which can be utilized.

  What constitutes the excessive generality of the class S"? This class may

be understood mathematically as follows. If any system K of the class S" is

given, it is possible to transform it into another system K′ belonging to the

same class by means of a coordinate transformation




                                                      x = ƒ(x’ . . . x’) i=1...4
                                                      ii14




The class S" will now have to be characterized by a specification of the exact

form  which  this  transformation  will  have  to  assume.  The  followingconsiderations will achieve this aim.

The light-geometry has been constructed for each of the systems S" and the

equality of distances is so defined that a light ray travels equal distances in

equal times, i.e., the velocity of light becomes constant. Since, according to

our assumption, the light-geometry is Euclidean in each of these systems, the

propagation of light is given by the relation






A

 
                                          (1)



where Δ indicates the difference between corresponding coordinates of the

two endpoints. If we write x for ct (this is only a convenient notation for the
                                4
                          2
unit of time), and put x on the left-hand side, the equation reads
                          4






Ax 2+ Ax92+Ax32 —Ax42 = 0
                                          (2a)



In  the  moving  system K",  the  propagation  of  light  must  be  given  by  a

corresponding equation of the same form






Ax'\24-Ax' 92 +-Ax'52

  
                                          (2b)



The required transformation is therefore characterized by the condition that it

transforms (2a) into (2b).

The  solution  to  this  problem  is  well  known  to  the  mathematician.  The                                                          66
condition is satisfied by the linear transformations 







= ajx'y
                                          (3a)



where the coefficients satisfy the condition








(+h2fori=1=1,2,3
[a%a%] =<4 0 fori#l
—k2for i

 

4
                                          (3b)



and  the  summation  is  made  over  the  repeated  superscript.  These

transformations are identical with the Lorentz transformation except for the

constant k, which will be discussed presently. Another transformation that

satisfies the condition is given by the form








#
P ]

 
                                          (4)



These relations are called similarity transformations. If one coordinate system

satisfying (2a) is given, the class S" is then determined as the totality of those

systems derivable from the given one by the transformations (3) and (4).

  Class S" is therefore too general, since the class I of inertial systems is

connected  by  the  Lorentz  transformations  alone,  while  transformation  (4)

leads out of this class. The class S" constitutes the limit for the determinationof  the  state  of  motion  by  light-geometry.  The  determination  of  class I,  a

subclass of S", is not possible unless we can avail ourselves of some physical

means other than light signals. Only one argument can be raised in favor of

defining class I by means of light-geometry alone; it can be shown that a

system T which belongs to S” but not to I has a physical singularity. The

system T contains light signals that pass through infinity and yet return within

a finite interval of time; and it contains finitely located points that can be

connected by light signals in one direction only while the return signals never

reach their goals. If we consider the difference between finite and infinite as

physically recognizable in the sense of § 12, the class I can therefore be

defined  by  means  of  the  light-geometry.  However,  since  the  light-axioms

apply, as we shall discuss later, only in limited regions of space, and since no

unlimited spaces can be utilized for a decision, this method is not fruitful. We

can  always  describe  systems T  that  deviate  from  systems  of  class I  only

outside the space we have at our disposal.

We must therefore look for another way to exclude transformation (4) and

thus  systems  of  the  kind T.  If  we  go  from  a  system K  by  means  of  the

transformation  (4)  to  a  system K′,  the  points  of  the  latter  are  not  at  rest

relative to the points of K, and its space axes constantly expand relative to K.
                                                    67
Therefore K′ has a different measure of time.

We can therefore exclude these transformations by introducing material

bodies. The points of a system I can always be connected by rigid rods, while

this is not possible in a system T. Thus we have obtained a definition for

inertial systems. Furthermore, the time of a system I corresponds to the time

of natural clocks, which is not true for a system T. This reference to clocks

could also be used as a definition of the class of inertial systems. With the

introduction of material bodies it is thus possible to eliminate the systems T.

It should be noticed that this method does not even utilize the most important

function of material bodies. The rigid rod is not used for the definition of

spatial congruence within the system, but only for the determination of one

—and  indeed  only  one—distance  as  rigid,  i.e.,  for  the  definition  of  the

temporal congruence of spatial distances. For this reason natural clocks can

be  employed  for  the  definition  of  rigidity.  It  suffices  to  specify  the time

metric at a space point. Then the rigidity of the entire system and of the set of

systems, even their state of motion, is determined by means of light signals.

Although this determination refers only to the internal state of the systems, itthus establishes their state of motion in space. This is only possible because

the light-geometry introduces rather strong restrictions and connects every

possible state of motion with a corresponding internal metric.

  Finally we shall investigate how to change the transformations (3) into the

Lorentz transformations, with which they are not yet identical because of the

general constant k. We required of the desired transformations that they leave

the expression (2) invariant; this requirement corresponds to the condition

that the light-geometry be carried through in each system, but it does not yet

determine  the  comparison  of  units  between  systems  in  different  states  of

motion. Yet to be specified is the comparison, of the rest-length of moving

line-segments, the first comparison of length in kinematics (compare § 25). If

rigid rods are used as the unit in K, then it is convenient to call the rest-length

of the rod transported into the moving system K′ equally long in the new

system. This procedure is not possible in the light-geometry, however, since

there is nothing to transport. Consequently another comparison of the units

must be found; it is accomplished with the aid of the second comparison of

length in kinematics. If we consider arbitrary units of length in K and K′

respectively, then the unit in K can be measured in K′, and vice versa, with

the aid of the concept of length of a moving segment. We shall not obtain the

same contraction or expansion factor in both of these cases because of the

arbitrary  choice  of  the  units.  If  the  identity  of  this  factor  is  required  by

definition, however, the choice of the rest-unit of one will depend on the

choice of the other, and we have thus given a rule for the first comparison of

length in kinematics.

  These conditions are identical with setting k = 1, as can easily be shown.

Since  coordinative  definitions  are  arbitrary,  we  can  set k  =  1.  With  this

additional rule, (3) becomes identical with the Lorentz transformation, which

can now be written in the form








(+lfori=10=1,23
(5a) x =aixy  jata}] = 0fori#1
—1 for ¢

 

=k
                                          (5b)To go from here to the well-known form of this transformation, we need

only  a  few  simplifying  specializations  which  again  are  of  the  nature  of

definitions. We give identical origins to the two systems, choose their space

axes parallel, and specify the direction of motion of one system as being the

direction of the x, axis of the other. This results in the familiar form of the
                  1

Lorentz transformation:










 
                                          (6)



in which “ct” and “ct”’ are substituted for “x” and “x′” respectively. The
                                                      44

twenty  constants  of  transformation  (5)  are  reduced  by  these  special

conditions to the single constant v.

 

An exact presentation of these special conditions is given in § 17 of A.,

where they are expressed by means of restricting equations on the . Simple

calculations lead from them to the special values of the  which appear in

(6). The derivation of equations (6) from the invariance (2) can be found in

many texts on the theory of relativity, but the distinction between definitions

and empirical statements is usually not stated clearly.

 

The goal of determining the class of inertial systems and their metric has

thus been attained, and this chapter of the theory of space and time might be

regarded  as  closed.  However,  since  there  are  also  measuring  instruments

other than light, namely measuring rods and clocks, and since these have so

far played a subordinate role in our construction, it is important to ask how

these objects behave in relation to the light-geometry. We could have started

with these measuring instruments and used light solely for the definition of

simultaneity, in which case we would also have obtained a geometry. We

may now ask how this geometry would be related to the light-geometry. Thestatements about this relation are formulated as the matter-axioms in contrast

to the light-axioms used exclusively so far.

The formulation of these statements requires an additional consideration.

Because  of  the  definitions  involved,  the  constructed  light-geometry  is

arbitrary. The choice of the definitions determines whether the relativistic or

the classical light-geometry will be obtained. The light-axioms can be the

same for both. The relativistic light-geometry that we have developed above

differs therefore from the classical theory only in the choice of definitions.

Instead of the Lorentz transformation, Galileo’s transformation could thus be

defined. For this purpose, a spatial congruence that varies from system to

system would have to be defined. Distances traveled by light in equal times

would  then  in  general  not  be  equal,  since  according  to  the  Galilean

transformation the velocity of light depends on the direction of the moving

system.  Furthermore,  another  comparison  of  the  rest-length  of  moving

segments and another simultaneity would have to be defined, for which the

factor ε in formula (1) depends on the direction. The classical light-geometry

is possible, because the light-axioms in the theory of relativity do not differ

from those in classical theory except for the assertion of the limiting nature of

the  velocity  of  light.  Even  if  this  axiom  applies,  however,  the  Galilean

transformation can be defined. The difference consists solely in the fact that

only systems moving slower than light can be realized by material things.

The context of the matter-axioms (axioms VI—X) can be summarized as

follows: Material things follow the relativistic light-geometry. If distances

which are light-geometrically equal are measured by rigid rods, they will also

turn  out  to  be  equal.  If  the  flow  of  time,  light-geometrically  defined  as

uniform, is compared with that of a natural clock, they are found to agree.

Similar  results  hold  for  assertions  concerning  the  transport  of  clocks  and

measuring  rods  into  moving  systems.  We  find  agreement  when  they  are

compared  with  units  which  were  light-geometrically  transferred  to  the

moving system. For this transfer we must use the definitions of the relativistic

light-geometry,  not  the  classical  definitions. Einstein’s  assertion  can  be

expressed by saying that material things adjust, not to the classical, but to the

relativistic light-geometry.

This assertion constitutes what is new in the theory of relativity from the

point of view of physics. Whereas all of the light-axioms hold in classical

optics,  to  which  the  theory  of  relativity  adds  only  the  assertion  that  thevelocity of light is the upper limit for the speed of signals, the matter-axioms

signify a deviation from classical theory. They contain the assertion that the

Lorentz transformation, which in the light-geometry differs from the Galilean

transformation only by definition, is at once the transformation for measuring

rods and clocks. This assertion contains, therefore, that part of the relativistic

theory of space and time which is to be tested empirically.

We have now succeeded in distinguishing between the physical assertions

of the relativistic theory of space and time and its epistemological foundation.

This  epistemological  foundation  is  supplied  by  the  discovery  that

coordinative definitions are needed far more frequently than was believed in

the  classical  theory  of  space  and  time,  especially  for  the  comparison  of

lengths at different locations and in systems in different states of motion, and

for simultaneity. The physical core of the theory, however, consists of the

hypothesis that natural measuring instruments follow coordinative definitions

different from those assumed in the classical theory. This statement is, of

course, empirical. On its truth depends only the physical theory of relativity.

However, the  philosophical  theory  of  relativity,  i.e.,  the  discovery  of  the

definitional character of the metric in all its details, holds independently of

experience.  Although  it  was  developed  in  connection  with  physical

experiments, it constitutes a philosophical result not subject to the criticism

of the individual sciences.

In the following we shall demonstrate how the content of the light-and

matter-axioms  can  be  visualized  geometrically  by  the  world-geometry  of

Minkowski.


§ 28. THE INDEFINITE SPACE-TYPE

We  have  derived  the  Lorentz  transformation  by  transforming  the

expression






Axy2 4 Axo® 4 Axg?—Axg® = 0
                                          (1)into a similar expression in the variables x′, a transformation which leaves
                                                    1

expression (1) invariant. It can be shown that the Lorentz transformation (5,

§ 27) possesses the additional property that it also leaves the expression






Axy® 4 Axg® 4 Axg® —Axg® = As?

 
                                          (2)



invariant. This is a special property of the linear transformation (5, § 27) not
                                              68
shared  by  transformation  (4,  §  27).  The  Lorentz  transformation  can

therefore be exhaustively defined in a purely mathematical fashion, if we

specify that it leave expression (2) invariant, which condition automatically

determines  the  value k  =  1.  This  property  is  the  basis  of  Minkowski’s

geometrical interpretation of the Lorentz transformation.

This interpretation is carried through on the basis of the formal analogy of

(2) with the Pythagorean theorem. We shall concern ourselves first with the

extension  of  the  space-type  which  results  from  these  considerations;  its

application will follow in § 29. This extension starts with the concept of

length.

By the length of a line-segment we do not understand the segment itself,

but  a  number  coordinated  to  it.  A  segment  is  determined  if  we  give  the

coordinates of the totality of points which lie on it. This information does not

tell us, however, how long it is; an indication of length signifies in addition a

comparison  of  this  segment  with  other  segments.  Length  is  therefore

determined only if a definition of congruence is added. The definition of

congruence is given in analytical geometry by a formula correlated to the

coordinates of the segment, which determines the length of the segment as a

function of the coordinates. For a straight segment it would be sufficient to

know the two endpoints, in which case formulaAx1 %+ Ax® +Ax3® = As?
                                          (3a)



which is the same as the Pythagorean theorem, expresses the distance for

three-dimensional space. Incidentally, this simple form can be used only if

the  coordinates  satisfy  certain  conditions;  they  must  be  rectilinear  and

orthogonal. A generalization to arbitrary coordinate systems will be discussed

in § 39. Extending the theorem to a four-dimensional space, we would have






Axy® 4 Axg® 4 Axg® - Axg® = As?
                                          (3b)



This formula, however, is not yet equivalent to expression (2), in which the
        2
term Δx has a negative sign. How can our considerations be extended to
        4

such an expression?

The extension is possible if we employ the previously discussed rule of

consistent extension. We shall define the concept of length in such fashion

that it will include expression (2), as follows:

  Definition. The coordination of a number Δs to the coordinate differences

Δx ... Δx by means of the fundamental metrical form
14






Ax 24 Ax22 4+ A3%+ Ax42

 
                                          (4)



defines the measure of length.

This  extension  of  the  concept  of  length  represents  a  logical  procedure

previously (§ 25) explained by the example of the concept of the vector sum.

It cannot be called true or false since it merely constitutes a definition. It

satisfies the rule of consistent extension because it becomes identical with (3)in the special case when all the signs are the same. A metric of this special

kind is called definite, while one that has positive as well as negative signs is

called indefinite.

The difference between a definite metric and an indefinite metric of the

form (2) can best be understood by means of Fig. 30a and b. For the sake of

simplicity these figures are drawn for only two coordinates, and we have



                                          (5a)










4s% = Ax2+Axg®
 

Axy2—Axq2
                                          (5b)



Figure 30a corresponds to the definite type (5a). The lines which are at a

constant distance from the origin, the contour lines, are circles, 
                    Fig. 30. Definite and an indefinite metric.



since (5a) represents the equation of a circle with the radius Δs. Fig. 30b

corresponds to the indefinite type (5b); the contour lines are now hyperbolas,

since (5b) is the equation of a hyperbola, the distance of whose vertex from
                                            2
the  origin  is Δs.  The  hyperbola Δs  =  0  has  degenerated  into  the  two

asymptotes.

Now  (5)  defines  a  metric  and Δs  therefore  is  to  be  conceived  as  the

distance of the point (x, x) from the origin. This statement is immediately
                          14

clear for Fig. 30a, which simply states that OA equals OB. The same must be

true for Fig. 30b, and consequently every point on a given hyperbola must

have the same constant distance from the origin; OA must equal OB also in

Fig. 30b. While this equality corresponds to the normal congruence for Fig.

30a, we must remember the definitional character of congruence in order to

understand Fig. 30b. The distances OA and OB in Fig. 30b appear different

because (§ 11) our visual estimate is adjusted to the behavior of rigid bodies,

which satisfy the relations of Fig. 30a. We can now adopt the previously used

method and visualize the new metric by imagining bodies that would satisfy

it. Let us therefore imagine the distance OA realized by a rod. If we now

rotate this rod so that one end remains fixed at O, the other end will travel

along the hyperbola and the rod will assume the position OB and similar

positions.  We  can  easily  visualize  this  situation  if  we  remember  that

congruence is a matter of definition. The behavior of the imagined rods thus

offers a visual realization of the metric (5b).

The difficulties arising from the metric of Fig. 30b do not spring from the

comparison  of  length  but  from  another  property  of  this  metric.  The  lines

which have an inclination of 45° are null lines, i.e., any distance on them,

such  as  the  distance OE,  has  the  length  zero.  This  singularity  is  not

compatible with the customary visual concept of length, yet this property too

can be visualized as will be shown presently.

A rod OB rotated around O reaches the position OA and remains with its

end on the same hyperbola, so that the end moves far away when the rod

approaches an inclination of 45° and lies at infinity when that inclination is

reached.  In  this  position  the  rod  would  be  infinitely  extended.  We  shall

assume,  as  in  §  12,  that  this  is  impossible,  which  means  that  the  45°inclination  is  a  limiting  position  that  cannot  be  reached  but  can  only  be

approached as closely as we wish. We shall assign to a segment OE in this

singular  position  the  length  zero,  because  the  asymptote  represents  the

innermost (degenerate) hyperbola and corresponds therefore to the contour

line of the shortest measure of length.

On either side of the limiting position, the rods behave normally according

to the hyperbolic contour lines. Because of the unattain-ability of the limiting

position, however, it is not possible to rotate a rod from the position OC into

the position OA. Instead, it can be brought into the position OD. We have

therefore two kinds of rods, which we shall call the blue and the red rods. The

direction of the blue rods lies always in quadrants I and II, that of the red

ones always in quadrants III and IV. It is possible to move the rods so that

they  intersect  the  asymptotes,  but  they  can  never  be  rotated  beyond  the

limiting position. A red rod can therefore never be brought into the position

of  a  blue  rod  and  vice  versa.  To  distinguish  between  these  two  kinds  of
                              2
length, we shall give the Δs of quadrants I and II a negative sign.

                                                                  22
The peculiar form of metric that admits of lengths Δs = 0 and Δs < 0 is

the  natural  expression  of  the  behavior  of  the  described  measuring

instruments. The division into two types of rods which cannot be compared is
                                                22
symbolized by the distinction between Δs > 0 and Δs < 0, and the limiting
          2
case by Δs = 0. This metric entails certain deviations from the customary

concept of length; but these deviations are necessitated by the behavior of the

described rods. We shall now follow this line of thought in more detail.

It was mentioned before that we understand by the length of a segment, not

the  segment  itself,  but  a  number  coordinated  to  it.  The  customary

measurement  of  length,  although  it  recognizes  this  distinction,  adds  the

further requirement that the length zero be coordinated only to a point. This

requirement is violated for the limiting position (but only for this position).

The concepts of length and extension no longer coincide in this special case.

A segment in the limiting position can be long in the sense of extended, and

yet have the length zero. Extension is a topological concept; a geometrical

structure is extended if it contains a continuous sequence of points. Whether

or not there is an extension is determined by the coordinate system; extension

is  therefore  a  concept  referring  to  coordinates.  What length  is  to  be

coordinated  to  a  geometrical  element,  however,  is  not  determined  by  the

coordinate  system.  Instead,  the  measurement  of  length  characterizes  thebehavior of measuring instruments. This behavior includes a singularity in

the limiting position; a rod of finite length will not coincide with a finite line-

segment in the limiting position, but compared to it would be infinitely long.

Because of this peculiarity we assign to every finite extension in the limiting

position the length zero. If we were able to rotate an extension like OE into a

different direction, it would assume the extension zero. In renouncing, for the

limiting  position,  the  requirement  that  length  zero  is  to  be  reserved

exclusively for a point, we adjust our metric to the behavior of our measuring

rods,  relative  to  which  the  measure  of  a  finite  extension  in  the  limiting

position is indeed zero. We have here a topologically different behavior of

measuring instruments and are therefore forced to abandon the mentioned

requirement although it is satisfied by the customary measurement of length.

It  is  merely  a  reasonable  extension  of  the  concept  of  length  to  admit

negative numbers for the square of a length. Customarily, length is defined as

a positive number, but there are instances where the introduction of negative

length appears useful. In the metric of Fig. 30b even the square of a length

can become negative, and therefore the length itself imaginary. But this fact

is of secondary importance, because it is irrelevant whether we consider Δs or
2
Δs  as  the  length.  The  distinction  is  merely  a  matter  of  expediency.  As

always,  the  introduction  of  imaginary  numbers  is  merely  an  arithmetical

device, which by no means implies that “space or the measuring instrument

becomes imaginary.” That would be nonsensical.

Our presentation has shown that a manifold of the indefinite type can be

visualized  just  as  well  as  one  of  the  definite  type.  If  it  is  said  that  a

nonvanishing  extension  of  the  length  zero,  or  a  length  whose  square  is

negative, cannot be visualized, such an objection indicates that requirements

have  been  tacitly  retained  which  apply  only  to  the  usual  measuring

instruments. It is not the advantage of visualizability that makes us retain

these  requirements  for  the  customary  geometry  of  space;  it  is  merely  the

behavior  of  the  usual  measuring  instruments  that  induces  us  to  project  a

metric of the definite type into the space of our environment. If the measuring

instruments actually behaved like the blue and red rods, their behavior would

be represented by the indefinite type of metric in the same sense as we can

say that the behavior of the usual measuring rods is characterized by the

definite type of metric. We have thus visualized the indefinite type of space

by imagining the corresponding behavior of measuring instruments.At the same time, we recognize that the customary measuring instruments

represent a special type of geometrical relations. These results may be added

to our previous considerations regarding the problem of space, although the

ideas  expressed  in  this  section  are  intended  to  serve  mainly  for  the

application of the indefinite metric to a quite different manifold, namely, the

space-time manifold.


§ 29. THE FOUR-DIMENSIONAL REPRESENTATION OF

THE SPACE-TIME GEOMETRY

We have illustrated in the previous section the indefinite space-type by

means of the behavior of rigid rods, considering them as the realization of the
2
Δs. Thus we described it as a pure space-type. In the case of the Lorentz

transformation,  however,  the  fourth  dimension  is  given  by time,  and  the
                  2
realization of Δs must therefore be carried out in a different fashion. We

shall discuss this method in connection with the work of Minkowski.

Let us recall a consideration of § 16 according to which the time dimension

differs basically from the space dimension. If we wish to study the actual

space-time  manifold,  we  must  therefore  look  for space-time  objects  that

behave like the distances OA, OB ..., etc. Such objects are clocks and, with an

additional qualification, measuring rods.

The  point  of  the  space-time  manifold  is  the point-event,  i.e.,  an  event

determined by three space coordinates and one time coordinate. The “tick” of

a clock is an example of such an event. A space point P, on the other hand, is

represented by a line which corresponds to the flow of time at P and is called

its  world-line.  The  space  point  at  rest  is  represented  by  a  vertical  line;  a

slanted straight line would correspond to a uniformly moving space point,

since its position in the coordinate system changes with time. Any two point-

events determine a “distance” Δs. We shall call such a distance an interval, in

contrast to spatial distances and, as we shall see, also in contrast to temporal

distances. The interval is therefore a metrical concept which corresponds to

length and not to extension and is determined by its two endpoints.

                                              2
Let us look first for the interval Δs = 0. This interval is given by the
                                                        2
motion of light, which satisfies the equation Δs = 0. According to page 179

this equation is represented by the asymptotes of Fig. 30b, and the world-line

of a light ray traveling along the axis is therefore given by a straight linehaving an inclination of 45°. For this light ray x = x, since we have set the
                                                        14

velocity of light equal to 1.

The limiting position in Fig. 30b is thus represented by the motion of light.

World-lines whose directions lie in quadrants I and II are called timelike (Fig.

31); they correspond to space points that move slower than light. The slope of

the straight line is a direct measure of the velocity of the corresponding space

point; the closer its inclination approaches the asymptote, the greater will be

its velocity. World-lines whose directions fall into quadrants III and IV are

called spacelike. They cannot be realized by moving mass points, since they

would require a velocity greater than that of light. The difference between the

blue and red rods in our illustration of § 28 corresponds therefore to the

difference between timelike and spacelike world-lines. Timelike world-lines,

according to our definition of time order in § 21, are those lines whose point-

events follow one another in time, since they can be connected by means of

signals.  Spacelike  world-lines,  however,  connect  point-events  that  are

indeterminate as to time order (§ 22).

The choice of the coordinate axes has the following significance. We may

choose any timelike line as the time axis, because this is compatible with the

definition of time order. Since differently inclined timelike lines represent the

world-lines of mass points in different states of motion, the choice of one of

them as the time axis constitutes the selection of one state of motion as the

state of rest. The choice of the time axis therefore determines the state of

motion of the coordinate system. Any spacelike line, on the other hand, may

be chosen as the space axis, since we can always define its point-events as

simultaneous.  The  choice  of  a  definite  spacelike  line  as  the  space  axis

represents therefore the choice of a particular definition of simultaneity.  

determinate as
to time order,/

As*<o |/

 
      
     
  
   
     
   

 

as to time order

2

determinate as
to time order
!

=
                  Fig. 31. Division of the space-time manifold.



  Generally speaking, any space axis may be combined with any time axis to

form a coordinate system, as in Fig. 31 for instance, the timelike line 1 and
                      69
the spacelike line 3. If we require, however, according to the relativistic

light-geometry, that simultaneity is to be defined by  =  (2, § 19) for every

state of motion, then this requirement coordinates a definite space axis to

every time axis. (In Fig. 31, for example, line 2 is coordinated to line 1.) It

can  be  shown  that  this  prescription  corresponds  in  the  geometrical

representation to the requirement that the time axis and the space axis must

form conjugate diameters of the hyperbolas.

                                                                2
We  now  look  for  a  realization  of  the  negative Δs,  i.e.,  we  look  for  a

physical  object  that  satisfies  the  relations  of  congruence  defined  by  the

hyperbolas of quadrants I and II. Let us turn to Fig. 32, in which we have
                                                          2
drawn only the four branches of the hyperbola Δs = ±1. Let us first consider                                                          2
the interval OQ, which belongs to the quadrant Δs < 0. How can this interval

be realized? The vertical axis OQ corresponds to the world-line of a point at

rest in the coordinate system K. Events O and Q are therefore given by the

beginning and end of a period of a unit clock at rest in K. If we write for these

events the interval







Axy® 4 Ao Axs®—Axg® = As®
                                          (1)



this form reduces to






—dx,2 = As2
                                          (2)



because there is no change in position relative to K, i.e., Δx = Δx = Δx = 0.
                                                                      123

The interval OQ is therefore measured by the period of a unit clock at rest in

K. 
    Fig. 32. Realization of the indefinite metric by means of clocks and

                                    measuring rods.



Let us now consider the interval OQ′, which equals OQ and also equals 1.

It corresponds to the section OQ′ of the world-line of the moving space point

P′ on which events take place at O and at Q′. Relative to K it is measured by

(1). If we now change to a coordinate system K′ by means of the Lorentz

transformation, the same interval is expressed by






A2 4-Ax' 2+ Ax'32—Ax' 4% = As?
                                          (3)since it is the peculiarity of the Lorentz transformation that it leaves this

expression invariant (cf. p. 177). The coordinates determined by the light-

geometrical  metric  are  exactly  those  coordinates  for  which  the  metrical

formula assumes this simple form. This result expresses the analogue of the

geometrical assertion of the previous section that the simple formula of the

metric (3a, § 28) applies only to rectilinear orthogonal coordinates. We can

go even further. The coordinates given by measuring rods and clocks must

correspond to those coordinates which satisfy (1) and (2) respectively, since

this correspondence is expressed by the matter-axioms.

Now we can give a very simple interpretation of OQ′. If we choose a K′

relative to which P′ is at rest, then expression (3) reduces to






—Ax'g® = As?
                                          (4)



for OQ′, since we have again Δx′ = Δx′ = Δx’ = 0. This means that interval
                                      123

OQ’ too is measured by the period of a unit clock, if this clock moves along
                                                                                70
the world-line OQ′. We therefore call Δs the characteristic time  of the

clock and may now say: a timelike interval is realized by the characteristic

time of a moving clock, and the rotation of the interval OQ into the position

OQ’ is realized by placing the clock into a different state of motion.

                                                                  2
We shall now look for a realization of the positive Δs, i.e., for a physical

object that satisfies the relations of congruence of the hyperbolas in quadrants

III  and  IV.  Let  us  first  choose  the  interval OS  that  corresponds  to  two

simultaneous events in K, the spatial distance of which is equal to 1. Since

now Δx = 0, expression (1) reduces to
      4






Ax 24 Axo? - Axg2 = As?
                                          (5)                                                                            2
This  interval  is  therefore  measured  by  the  spatial  length Δσ  of  a  unit

measuring rod.

Now let us choose the interval OS′, which equals OS and also equals 1. It is

measured in K by formula (1). If we want to reduce (1) to an expression

corresponding to (5), we must introduce a different simultaneity for which

OS′ is a simultaneity cross-section. This is easily accomplished if we place

the rod into the moving system K′, since OS′ is the space axis corresponding

to the time axis OQ′ according to Einstein’s simultaneity, if OQ′ and OS′ are

conjugate diameters. The two ends of the rod describe the world-lines OQ′

and SS′, and the rod is represented by the slanted strip enclosed between the
    1

two world-lines. Therefore OS′ is the position of the rod for a simultaneity

cross-section x′; OS′ is represented by the events occurring at its two ends, if
                4

these  events  are  simultaneous  in  the  sense  of  Einstein’s  definition  of

simultaneity for K′. This definition reduces (3) to the expression






Ax' 24 Ax' 2 Ax's® = As?
                                          (6)



Interval OS′ is therefore likewise measured by the length of a measuring rod,

if the rod is moved in the described fashion. Corresponding to the concept of

characteristic time we now form the concept of characteristic length: the

characteristic  length  of  a  measuring  rod  is  determined  by  two  events

occurring at its endpoints, when these events are simultaneous according to

Einstein’s definition of simultaneity for that system in which the measuring

rod is at rest. A spacelike, interval is realized by the characteristic length of a

measuring rod, and the rotation of interval OS into position OS′ is realized

by  placing  the  measuring  rod  into  a  different.  state  of  motion  and  by

producing  events  at  its  ends  that  are  simultaneous  according  to  the

appropriate definition of simultaneity.

This result shows a peculiar difference between clocks and measuring rods.

Clocks are inherently four-dimensional instruments, since the endpoints of

their unit distances are events. Measuring rods, on the other hand, are three-

dimensional measuring instruments; their endpoints are space points and theycan be changed into four-dimensional measuring instruments only if events

are produced at their endpoints according to a special rule.

  These  considerations  show  that  clocks  and  measuring  rods  supply  a

realization of the indefinite geometry of Fig. 30b, and that this geometry

characterizes  the  structure  of  the  space-time  manifold. The  assertion  that

measuring rods, clocks, and light rays behave according to the relations of

congruence of the indefinite metric represents the geometrical formulation of

the light- and matter-axioms.

We  have  previously  discussed  (page  160)  the  assertion  concerning  the

union of space and time. On the basis of the geometrical representation we

can now clarify this assertion. Surely, the graphical representation of time,

the combination of space and time into one manifold, is not new, since it also

holds in the classical theory of time. The new content can be summarized in

the following two assertions.

First, it is maintained that the element of the manifold determined by two

point-events,  namely  the  interval,  finds  its  natural  realization  by  clocks,

measuring rods and light rays. This means that these measuring instruments

introduce into the manifold certain congruence relations of a very specific

kind. It is this fact which has made the four-dimensional treatment of space

and time so fruitful, and which is expressed in the statement that clocks,

measuring rods, and light rays assume for the four-dimensional space-time

manifold a function which is similar to the function performed by rigid rods

in  three-dimensional  space.  It  is  true  that  the  classical  space-time  theory

could have treated space and time as a four-dimensional manifold; it would

even  have  been  possible  to  define  some  metric  within  this  manifold.

However,  there  would  have  existed  no  physical  objects  that  would  have

realized the congruence relations of this metric. The assertion that there exists

a natural metric for the space-time manifold has therefore great significance

for physics. In this sense we may speak of a union of space and time. This

does not mean, however, that space and time lose their specific individual

differences, for, clearly, clocks and measuring rods are quite different types

of measuring instruments. This union of space and time, therefore, preserves

their specific properties.

 

The transition from the indefinite metric of the theory of relativity to the

classical  theory  of  time  can  be  characterized  by  the  replacement  of  thelimiting velocity c by ∞. The basic metrical formula will then degenerate,

since x = ct becomes infinite, and no metric of this kind is possible. If we
      4

were to construct a metric in the classical theory of time, we would not work

with an indefinite metric, but would use the definite metric (3b, § 28) and

define the congruence of four-dimensional intervals in an arbitrary fashion.

Of course, there are such intervals even in the classical theory of space and

time, but there is no natural rule, only arbitrary definitions, for their relations

of  congruence,  i.e.,  for  the  measurement  of  length.  The  clock  would  not

present a realization of these intervals, but would measure contour levels; see

§ 30.

  Secondly,  it  is  asserted  that  the  manifold  of  space  and  time  is  of  the

indefinite type. This assertion has the consequence that not only the time axis

can be rotated—this can also be done in the classical space-time theory, since

it merely means that any moving system may be chosen as the one at rest—

but even the space axis can be rotated. In the classical theory of space and

time the space axis could not be rotated, because the angles of quadrants III

and IV were equal to 0. These differences of the new space-time theory in

this respect have been the cause of erroneous interpretations. It was believed

that  the coupling  of  the  space  and  time  axes  supplied  by  the  Lorentz

transformation, according to which every choice of the time axis determines a

corresponding  space  axis  as  the  conjugate  diameter,  signifies  a  more

fundamental junction of space and time. This coupling, however, is relatively

unimportant  because  it  is  based  on  an  arbitrary  additional  requirement,

introduced  only  for  descriptive  simplicity,  for  which  there  is  actually  no

epistemological need. The mistake committed here is the one pointed out on

page 146; it springs from the erroneous conception that there is a relation

between the relativity of simultaneity and the relativity of motion. Only the

fact that the space axis can be rotated independently of the time axis is new in

the  indefinite  metric.  This  statement  means  that  simultaneity  is  arbitrary

within a certain angular interval. We saw (§ 22) that this fact represents a

specific  feature  of  the  relativistic  theory  of  space  and  time,  which  we

formulated as a structural property of causal chains and illustrated in Fig. 23.

We showed in § 25 that the definitional nature of simultaneity results in an

indeterminateness for spatial measurements; therefore we cannot speak of the

state of a space at a definite time before a definition of simultaneity has been

given. For this reason the indefinite metric formulates a second important

point  that  can  be  referred  to  as  a  union  of  space  and  time.  But  thischaracterization of the space-time geometry can also be considered as leading

to a sharp separation of space and time, because in the equation (1) of the

indefinite metric one dimension is clearly distinguished from the others by

the negative sign. It is true, of course, that even this representation does not

exhaust the specific characteristics of time. This follows from the fact that the

purely spatial metric of § 28 also represents the indefinite type, i.e., that an

indefinite metric can likewise be realized by spatial measuring instruments

alone. However, equation (1) expresses an asymmetry between space and

time, which clearly distinguishes between the two.

The theory of relativity therefore does not maintain that time is the “fourth

dimension  of  space”;  it  is  and  remains  time  in  all  its  specific  properties.

When we symbolized time by means of a straight line in Figs. 31 and 32, we

only gave a graphical representation, which means that the logical structure

exhibited by the rods described in § 28 can also be realized by the space-time

manifold. This representation is analogous to the graphical representation of

thermodynamic relations (§ 15), which exhibit the same logical structure as

do rigid bodies (in this case the ordinary kind of rigid bodies). Therefore, the

combination  of  space  and  time  under  one  metric  cannot  erase  their

differences. If we speak of a geometrization of physical events, this phrase

should not be understood in some mysterious sense; it refers to the identity of

types of structure and not to the identity of the coordinated physical elements.

On the contrary, there are essential properties of time which are not expressed

in the geometrical representation in spite of the indefinite type of metric.

However, if we remember these limitations, geometrical representation and

visualization  by  means  of  drawings  can  always  be  used,  because  they

combine  the  rigor  of  logical  inference  with  mathematical  elegance  and

lucidity.


§ 30. THE RETARDATION OF CLOCKS

In this and the next section we shall deal with two consequences of the

matter-axioms  which  have  given  rise  to  misinterpretations  and  unjustified

criticism. The first concerns clocks; the second, measuring rods.

Let us assume that two clocks U and U are set according to Einstein’s
                                          12

definition (1, § 19) in an inertial system K (Fig. 33). A clock U′ with equal

rest-unit (that is, if it were to remain at rest next to U it would always show
                                                              1the same time as U) is moved in the direction of the arrow with a velocity v.
                    1

When  it  is  next  to U  it  shows  the  same  time  as U  (this  determination
                          11

requires  only  the  neighborhood  comparison  of  clocks);  what  will  it  show

when it reaches clock U? Einstein’s theory maintains that it will then be
                            2

slow relative to U.
                    2










U,
                          Fig. 33. Retardation of clocks.



This statement is also called Einstein’s retardation of clocks, according to

which a moving clock is slow relative to the time of the rest-system.

The  geometrical  interpretation  of  this  problem  leads  us  back  to  the

relations indicated in Fig. 19 (p. 134). Let us draw Fig. 19b again (Fig. 34)

with the difference, however, that we do not use the moving clock in our

definition of simultaneity, but compare it with a simultaneity obtained by

Einstein’s definition. The horizontal lines will now correspond to Einstein’s

simultaneity.  Furthermore,  we  shall  assume  uniform  motion,  i.e.,  that  the

world-line EE of the clock U′ is a straight line. According to Einstein’s
              12

retardation of clocks, the number of sections which the moving clock has

marked off along its world-line EE is different from the number of contour
                                      12

levels through which it has traveled. 
        Fig. 34. The difference between interval and coordinate time.



The relations drawn in Fig. 32 (p. 185) supply a simple explanation. OQ is

the period of a unit clock. The event Q is simultaneous with Q, measured
                                              1

according to Einstein’s simultaneity defined in K. When the moving clock

reaches Q it has not yet completed its period, since this is accomplished only
          1

at Q′. The difference between the classical and the relativistic theory of time,

therefore, is expressed in our geometrical interpretation as follows: according

to the classical theory of time, a moving clock measures the coordinate time,

and according to the relativistic theory it measures the interval.

  Which of the two theories of time is correct? At any rate, the distinction

between  interval  and  coordinate  time  is  certainly  correct.  The  difference

between the two theories of time consists in a purely physical assertion. It is

impossible to state a priori whether the moving clock indicates the coordinate

time  or  the  interval.  Epistemologically  speaking,  both  suppositions  are

possible; which of them applies to reality can be shown only by experience.

It is wrong, therefore, to say that the relativistic retardation of clocks is

inconceivable. One phenomenon is as conceivable as the other, and we can

only ask which one occurs in fact. Visualization cannot give us the answer;

only observation can do so. The relativistic hypothesis has been confirmed by

observation  of  traveling  atom-clocks,  which  in  fact  show  Einstein’s
            71
retardation. The classical theory is also based on a hypothesis, since it is a

physical  hypothesis  that  the  clock  which  travels  along EE  (Fig.  34)
                                                                          12

indicates  the  contour  levels,  and  not  the  length  of  the  world-line.  This

hypothesis is identical with the acceptance of a specific simultaneity, since

the moving clock can indicate the time difference only for one system ofcontour lines, which it would thus distinguish from all others.

An objection to the relativistic theory of clocks that plays an important role

in the literature, and may therefore be discussed, is given by the so-called

clock paradox. The clock U′ (Fig. 33) is slow compared to the time in K, and

when it reaches U will show an earlier time than U Let us imagine that U′
                    22.

is stopped in its path at this instant and turned around so that it will travel

back to U. The time taken in turning the clock around may be ignored, since
          1

it is negligible compared to the time of the round trip. The same retardation

occurs during the return trip, and U′ must therefore be slow compared to U
                                                                                          1

when it reaches U. The last statement is independent of both the simultaneity
                    1

definition for K and the behavior of U We can therefore say: if a clock U’ is
                                            2.

first moved away from U and then returned, it will be slow relative to U.
                            11

It  seems  that  according  to  the  theory  of  relativity  the  process  can  be

interpreted in the opposite manner. We consider U’ to be at rest, while U is
                                                                                        1

moved (to the left) and then returned. On the basis of this description we

should conclude that U is slow relative to U′, since U is the moved clock.
                          11

This result constitutes a contradiction, because a neighborhood comparison,

independently  of  the  definition  of  simultaneity,  can  tell  us  which  of  the

clocks is slow when they meet. Only one of the two assertions can be correct.

The  contradiction  is  quite  striking  and  may  under  no  circumstances  be

solved  by  considering  the  following  two  statements  compatible:  “when

brought together U′ is slow relative to U” and “when brought together U is
                                              11
                      72
slow relative to U′.“ The comparison of the two clocks is independent of

the  definition  of  simultaneity.  If  the  two  above  statements  were  both

considered to be true, such a conception would contradict the basic rule of the

theory  of  relativity  that  a  point-event  (a  coincidence)  has  an  objective

significance. A solution can be given only if we can show that one of the

apparently equally correct inferences is incorrect. In fact, it is the second one.                  Fig. 35. The asymmetry in the clock paradox.



The error lies in a misconception of relativity, which can be explained as

follows. The theory of gravitation shows (cf. § 39) that the special theory of

relativity  is  applicable  only  because  the  distant  masses  of  the  fixed  stars

(drawn as a circle in Fig. 35) determine a particular metrical field. If we take

account of the masses of the fixed stars F, the apparent equivalence of the

two  interpretations  vanishes.  According  to  the  first  interpretation U′  is

moving, while U and the fixed stars F remain at rest. According to the second

interpretation U′ is at rest, and U and the fixed stars F are in motion. This

analysis  eliminates  the  symmetry  of  the  two  processes;  the  second  is  an

entirely different process from the first because of the effect of the moving

fixed stars, which produce a gravitational field at the instant of the reversal of

the motion and thus cause a retardation of U′. Due to the gravitational field U′

is the retarded clock even according to the second interpretation. Calculations
                                                    73
prove this conclusion quantitatively correct. The mistake that led to the

paradox  therefore  resulted  from  the  fact  that  the  considerable  effects  of

gravitation were ignored.

A remark may be added concerning the extension of Einstein’s theory of

clocks  to  living  organisms.  The  retardation  of  clocks  has  often  been

illustrated by the example of the twins: of two newborn twins, one makes a

cosmic trip with a velocity slightly below the velocity of light and returns as

a boy, while the other twin has in the meantime become an old man. This

consequence, which many people have regarded as absurd, actually contains

nothing impossible or inconceivable and agrees with the theory of relativity

in every respect. In fact, a similar case has been described in W. Müller’spoem “Der Mönch von Heisterbach,” which describes a monk going on a

walk and returning after three hundred years to his monastery, where nobody

recognizes  him.  The  poet’s  imagination  thus  created  ideas  which  modern

physics no longer regards as impossible.

If the objection is raised that the theory of relativity as a physical theory

applies to physical processes alone and not to living organisms, one forgets

that there are many basic principles of physics which also apply directly to

living beings. Galileo’s law of falling bodies governs a falling stone as well

as a falling egg or a falling human being. The laws of gravitation apply in

general to animate and inanimate objects in equal fashion. After the discovery

of the spherical shape of the earth, it was immediately inferred from this

physical theory that human beings who live on opposite sides of the spherical

surface nonetheless have the subjective feeling of upright posture, because

living organisms adjust themselves to the physical gravitational field. It is a

similar claim which is made by the theory of relativity in the example of the

twins, namely, that living organisms, like clocks, adjust themselves to the

metrical field. It would be an unjustifiable hypothesis to assume that they

would behave differently, since the principle that the time scale of natural

clocks is identical with the time scale of living organisms (insofar as it can be

defined) is one of the oldest principles of natural science. The example of the

twins  is  explained  by  the  fact  that  the  ultimate  constituents  of  living

organisms are atoms. If every atomic period, i.e., the period of the electron

within the atom, is retarded to the same degree under the influence of motion

or  of  a  metrical  field,  physiological  phenomena  would  show  the  same

retardation. since they result from the integration of many atomic periods.


§ 31. THE LORENTZ CONTRACTION AND THE

EINSTEIN CONTRACTION

The theory of relativity makes an assertion about the behavior of rigid rods

similar to that about the behavior of clocks. This assertion states that the

characteristic  length  of  a  rod  measures  the  interval.  On  the  basis  of  the

geometrical interpretation of Fig. 32 (page 185) we can easily recognize that

this statement leads to consequences different from those of classical space-

time theory. According to classical theory, the moving rod is not represented

by the strip between the world-lines OQ′ and SS′, but by the wider strip
                                                          1

bounded by OQ′ at the left and SS’ at the right. This follows, according to
                                          2classical theory, because the length of the moving rod, measured in K, is

given  by OS,  and  its  rest-length  in K’  would  correspondingly  be OS’.
                                                                                          2

According to the theory of relativity, the rod has the shorter rest-length OS′ in

K′.

This assertion of the theory of relativity is based mainly on the Michelson
            74
experiment.  This  experiment  proves  that  the  rods  satisfy  the  light-

geometrical definition of congruence (cf. Fig. 29, page 170) where







 

AB = AC when A4BA
                                          (1)



in every inertial system, for any orientation of the coordinate axes. According

to classical theory, (1) is satisfied in only one of the inertial systems, namely,

the system at rest relative to the ether. In all other systems the rest-length of

one of the branches of the coordinate axes will no longer satisfy (1). Since the

Michelson experiment has been confirmed to a very high degree, we could

consider this matter closed, because it has no bearing upon epistemological

considerations, if it had not been given certain erroneous interpretations in

the usual discussions on relativity.

In order to explain the experiment Lorentz made the assumption that one


arm of the apparatus is contracted by the amount  when it moves

 
relative  to  the  ether.  Einstein,  on  the  other  hand,  considered  both  arms

equally long in every inertial system and calculated the contraction factor 


 
 in an entirely different manner, as a consequence of the relativity of

simultaneity. The opinion has been expressed that the contraction of one arm

of the apparatus is an “ad hoc hypothesis,” while Einstein’s hypothesis is a

natural explanation that is a consequence of the relativity of simultaneity.

Both  of  these  explanations  are  wrong.  The  relativity  of  simultaneity  has

nothing to do with the contraction in Michelson’s experiment, and Einstein’s

theory explains the experiment as little as does that of Lorentz.The above opinion is incorrect because the contraction of the arm of the

apparatus occurs for the moving system relative to which the apparatus is at

rest. The Einstein contraction would explain a contraction of the arm only if it

were  measured  from  a  different  system  and  is  therefore  not  sufficient  to

explain the Michelson experiment. This experiment proves that a rod which

lies along the direction of the motion is shorter than it should be according to

classical theory, iƒ it is measured relative to the rest-system. In other words:

the comparison of the rest-length of moving rods does not obey classical

theory. If there were a special inertial system I that could be regarded as an

absolute rest-system, and if we had in this system two equally long rigid rods,

one of which behaved according to classical theory and the other according to

Einstein’s theory, the two rods would cease to be equally long if they were

brought into any other inertial system S, provided that they lay along the

direction  of  the  motion  of S.  The  Einstein  rod  would  be  shorter.  The

difference  could  be  measured  in  S  as  the  difference  between  their  rest-

lengths, and in any other system as the difference between the lengths of the

moving rods. Einstein’s theory as well as Lorentz’s theory therefore assumes

the behavior of rigid rods to be measurably different from their behavior

according to classical theory; but the difference has nothing to do with the

definition of simultaneity.

                                                                              75
It has been objected to previous remarks of mine on this subject  that it is

impossible to compare two magnitudes belonging to different theories. This

objection is incorrect. By reference to a third body, we are able to establish a

comparison,  if  we  calculate  how  the  two  magnitudes  under  consideration

compare  with  that  third  body.  Furthermore,  this  mode  of  expression  is

frequently  used  in  physics.  We  may  say,  for  instance,  that  a  highly-

compressed gas behaves differently than it would according to Mariotte’s

law. This means nothing but that the real gas g, when compressed to a certain

degree, occupies a larger volume than a gas G which satisfies the Mariotte-

Boyle relations. The third body used in this comparison is the rigid measuring

rod  which  measures  the  volume.  The  third  body  is  not  always  explicitly

mentioned,  and  the  abbreviated  formulation  is  often  preferred,  because  it

clearly suggests a difference in actual behavior. The Lorentz contraction must

indeed be considered a real difference in this sense. In this case, the tertium

comparationis  is  light,  which  in  terms  of  light-geometrical  definitions

supplies  a  standard  to  which  the  rods  of  the  different  theories  can  be

compared. It would be an incorrect mode of speech, however, to say that theEinstein contraction is an apparent, difference. This contraction has nothing

to do with the difference between the real and the apparent, but results from a

difference in the conditions of measurement. We shall speak of a metrogenic

difference  because  this  difference  originates  in  the  nature  of  the

measurement. Since we are specifically concerned with kinematic conditions

of measurement, we shall speak of a metrokinematic difference.

We have pointed out before that the length of a rod is not the rod itself, but

a logical function thereof; it is a number coordinated to the rod expressing its

relation  to  other  rods.  The  process  of  coordination  depends  on  certain

specified  conditions.  In  the  discussion  of  the  concept  of  the  length  of  a

moving rod (§ 25) we emphasized that the coordinated length l depends on

the simultaneity s as well as the velocity v. It is to be expected, therefore, that

the coordinated length l will vary with changes in the two parameters s and v.

This  distinction  is  inherent  in  the  kinematic  system.  Just  as  we  spoke  of

perspective differences, in the previous example about the angle of vision, we

may now speak of metrokinematic differences. Without changes in the rod

itself, it is subjected to different kinematic conditions of measurement and

will therefore yield different measures within the frame of one consistent

theory.

The  situation  is  different  for  the  Lorentz  contraction.  It  compares  rods

under the same conditions of measurement relative to different theories. Here

we have conflicting empirical assertions, since the two theories exclude each

other. The same rigid rod behaves differently under the same conditions of

measurement whether the Lorentz or Einstein theories on the one hand, or the

classical theory on the other hand, are correct. We therefore speak of a real

difference when we compare the real behavior with a possible behavior of

objects.  This  real  difference  exists,  in  the  explanation  of  the  Michelson

experiment,  between  the  classical  theory  and  Einstein’s  theory  as  well  as

between  the  classical  theory  and  Lorentz’s  theory,  whereas  there  is  no

difference between Einstein’s and Lorentz’s theories; both assert the state of

affairs formulated in (1), while the classical theory differs from them in this

respect. The concept of simultaneity does not enter into this problem at all.

It would be advisable, therefore, not to use the same name for the two

“contractions.”  There  is  an Einstein  contraction,  which  results  from  the

relativity of simultaneity and compares the length of the moving rod with the

length of the rod at rest; and there is a Lorentz contraction, which comparesthe length of a rigid rod that satisfies the Michelson experiment with the

length of the rod as defined in the classical theory. It is a coincidence that


both have the same contraction factor  and this is probably the reason

that the two contractions have been so frequently confused. Their meanings

are different. In addition to the Einstein contraction, Einstein’s theory also

contains  the  Lorentz  contraction,  which  it  “explains”  as  little  as  does  the

Lorentz theory. It is simply assumed axiomatically.

  What is the difference between Einstein’s and Lorentz’s theories? In order

to  answer  this  question  let  us  distinguish  between  the  following  two

statements:

 

1. the rest-length of the moving rod is different from the rest-length of the

    rod at rest.

2. the rest-length of the moving rod is different from the rest-length of

    another rod which moves with it but satisfies the classical theory.


Statement  (b)  is  true.  This  was  proved  by  the  Michelson  experiment  and

some further assumptions; we shall call it the Lorentz contraction. In the

geometrical  representation  it  is  indicated  by  the  difference  between  the

distances OS′ and OS′ (Fig. 32, p. 185). As formulated, statement (a), on the
                        2

other hand, is neither true nor false; its truth depends on the coordinative

definition for the comparison of the rest-lengths of moving segments (cf. §

25).  In  the  geometrical  representation,  statement  (a)  is  equivalent  to  the

comparison of OS′ and OS. It seems that Lorentz believed that statement (a)

follows  from  statement  (b).  This  belief,  however,  would  constitute  an

epistemological  error.  Einstein’s  theory  rejects  Lorentz’s  conclusion  and,

recognizing the existence of a coordinative definition, regards the two rest-

lengths mentioned in (a) as equal. It is sometimes overlooked by proponents

of the theory of relativity that statement (b) is nevertheless true. It follows

that Einstein’s theory also contains a contraction which is independent of the

relativity  of  simultaneity,  namely,  the  Lorentz  contraction.  In  addition,

however, it contains the difference between the rest-length and the length of a

moving segment, in other words, the Einstein contraction.

If we say that the equality of the two contractions is “coincidental,” this

means that their equality depends on certain presuppositions; neverthelessthere is a theoretical connection between them. It can be shown that they

must always be equal if and only if the transformation is linear. The proof is

as follows. Let l be a rod that behaves according to the Lorentz or Einstein

theory and L be a rod that behaves according to classical theory. Their rest-

 
lengths in K  are  equal,  or   (where  the  upper  index  designates  the

system  in  which  the  measurement  is  performed,  and  the  lower  index  the

system in which the rod rests). The Lorentz contraction therefore concerns

the ratio






 
                                          (2)



while the Einstein contraction concerns the ratio






1%,

)
                                          (3)



According to classical theory we have  (this comparison uses the

simultaneity of K and is independent of that of K′), and since  we

obtain  . Relation (3) therefore becomes







 
i LE
                                          (4)



Because of the linearity of the transformation (and only because of it), ratio(4) is the same as ratio (2), which means that (3) is also the same as ratio (2).

On the other hand, the ratio







g4
                                          (5)



which  equals  (3)  according  to  the  Lorentz  transformation,  can  be  quite

different  even  if  we  use  linear  transformations.  This  fact  permits  us  to

construct an example in which an Einstein contraction appears but no Lorentz

contraction. If the rigid bodies did not behave like l in the relativistic sense,

but  like L  in  the  classical  sense,  there  would  be  no  Lorentz  contraction;

however, the Einstein contraction from K′ to K would also disappear, since







 
                                          (6)



If  we  nevertheless  define  the  simultaneity  in K′  according  to  Einstein,

setting  =  (see 2, § 19), the inverse comparison from K to K′ will show the

Einstein contraction







                                          (7)



the  magnitude  of  which  is  the  square  of  that  of  the  Lorentz-Einstein

contraction. This proof clarifies the fundamental difference between the two

contractions.The  difference  is  perhaps  most  conspicuous  in  the  geometrical

representation of Fig. 32 (p. 185). The Lorentz transformation claims that OS′

is shorter than OS′, since  and  . The Einstein contraction
0s' =&
0S'y

K
LE
                    2

maintains that OS is shorter than OS, since  and  . It can
 

0S1
0s
                    1

easily be seen that the second statement is a consequence of the first, because,

according  to  the  relativistic  theory  of  time,  the  rod  is  represented  by  a

narrower strip. Even if the classical theory were correct, and the rod were

represented  by  the  wider  strip,   would  still  be  shorter  than 

 
0S's = L§
 (SS′ is parallel to OQ and these two lines are the boundaries of
                3

the world-strip of the rod at rest in K). This means that for K′ there is an

Einstein contraction but no Lorentz contraction.

  Another example of an Einstein contraction without a Lorentz contraction

results if the rods behave like L, i.e., there is no Lorentz contraction, but

simultaneity in K is defined differently from Einstein’s . This makes 

 
 . The example used in a similar form in § 25, where we discussed

the dependence of the length of the moving segment on the definition of

simultaneity,  makes  it  particularly  clear  that  the  Einstein  contraction  is  a

metrogenic phenomenon. In the geometrical representation this means that

we may choose as the length of the rod differently directed sections through

the world-strip of the rod. On the other hand, the geometrical representation

of Fig. 32 shows very clearly that through the difference in the width of the

strip, the Lorentz contraction indicates a difference in the actual behavior of

the rod. These considerations also explain how it is possible to compare rods

l and L, although only one of them is physically realized. OS is the same in

both theories; the classical theory claims that the right-hand boundary of the

strip parallel to OQ′ must be drawn through S, whereas the new theory places

the boundary along the tangent to the hyperbola which passes through S.

If we wish to enter into the further question of an explanation, we should

first point out that the problem has been confused by the use of the word

“contraction.” This word has led to a mistaken application of the principle of

causality.  Looking  for  a cause  of  the  contraction,  some  philosophers  and

physicists  have  believed  that  a  cause  for  the difference  between  the

magnitudes must be found. This conception assigns a preferred position to

one theory, namely, the classical theory, whose laws are taken to be satisfiedby physical objects without a cause, while causes are made responsible only

for deviations from this behavior. The problem of causality is to be posed in a

different form; if we ask for a causal explanation, we must ask why it is that

measuring  rods  and  clocks  adjust  themselves  to  a  certain  transformation

defined in terms of light-geometry. This causal problem is the same whether

the rods and clocks adjust themselves to the relativistic or to the classical

transformation. The word “adjustment,” which was first used by Weyl in this

connection (cf. § 39), characterizes the problem very well. It cannot be an

accident that two measuring rods which have the same length at one place

always have the same length when brought to a different place along different

paths.  It  must  be  explained  as  an adjustment  to  the  field  in  which  the

measuring rods are embedded like test-bodies. Just as the compass needle

adjusts its direction to the magnetic field of its immediate environment, so

measuring rods and clocks adjust their unit length to the metrical field. All

metrical  relations  between  physical  structures  must  be  explained  in  this

fashion, including the Michelson experiment, according to which rigid rods

adjust themselves in a definite way to the motion of light. The answer can of

course be given only by a detailed theory of matter, which has not yet been

elaborated. It must be explained why the accumulations of density in certain

parts of the field, electrons and similar particles, provide a simple indication

for the metric of the surrounding field. The word “adjustment therefore poses

a problem rather than supplies a solution. The existing situation is formulated

rigorously by the matter-axioms without the use of the word “adjustment.” If

this theory of matter were exactly formulated, we would be able to explain

the metrical behavior of physical structures. For the time being, however, we

can speak of an explanation by Einstein’s theory as little as we can speak of

an explanation by Lorentz’s theory or by the classical theory.

Why  is  Einstein’s  theory  better  than  Lorentz’s  theory?  It  would  be

mistaken to argue that Einstein’s theory gives an explanation of Michelson’s

experiment, since it does not do so. Michelson’s experiment is simply taken

over as an axiom. However, Einstein’s theory is superior to Lorentz’s theory

because  it  renounces  the  quest  for  an  explanation  of  the  Michelson

experiment in terms of a “contraction.” The “explanation” given by Lorentz’s

theory is its weakness. It assumes the classical relations to be “self-evident”

and postulates incorrectly that any deviation from these relations must have a

cause. Einstein’s theory makes use of the arbitrariness of the coordinative

definition for the comparison of the rest-lengths of moving segments and callsthe  two  rods  equal  if  they  behave  in  accordance  with  the  Michelson

experiment. The superiority of Einstein’s theory lies in the recognition of the

epistemological legitimacy of this procedure.


§ 32. THE PRINCIPLE OF THE CONSTANCY OF THE

VELOCITY OF LIGHT

  Finally, we must mention in this connection the constancy of the velocity

of  light,  because  this  is  claimed  to  be  another  assertion  of  the  theory  of

relativity which is impossible to visualize. The statement that the same light

impulse can be considered as a spherical wave relative to systems in different

states  of  motion  is  only  an  apparent  contradiction.  It  is  solved  if  we

remember  that  the  wave  surface  is  not  a  material  surface,  but  an  ideal

structure projected into a process of propagation. Its shape therefore depends

on the nature of the construction, which is determined by the method of the

measurement of length, hence the definition of spatial congruence, and by the

definition of simultaneity. Since we are concerned with the shape of a moving

structure, measured from a rest-system, its shape can only be considered as its

simultaneity projection on the rest-system. If the definition of simultaneity is

changed,  the  shape  of  the  projection  is  changed,  and  if  the  Lorentz

transformation assumes a specific definition of simultaneity for every state of

motion,  then  the  shape  of  the  simultaneity  projection  can  easily  be  made

spherical for every state of motion. If it is argued that it is impossible to

visualize the same light impulse in the shape of a spherical wave for each of

two  systems  in  different  states  of  motion,  we  answer  that  this  apparent

impossibility results from the tacit introduction of assumptions ignoring the

demands of the theory. In fact, the theory does not say that the wave surfaces

in  the  two  systems  consist  of  the  same  point-events;  rather,  every  wave

surface compared to that of the other system represents a “focal-plane shutter

photograph” of the motion of light.

We may recall § 26, where we have shown that every centro-symmetric

process of propagation, not only light, is an indefinite structure, and that by

itself it does not define the state of motion of its center; this is accomplished

only by the addition of a definition of simultaneity. There we showed that the

propagation of the same light impulse can be conceived either as a system of

concentric spheres or as a system of eccentric spheres, the centers of which

move at a uniform velocity. The definition of simultaneity used in § 26 wasnot that of the Lorentz transformation, because we defined simultaneity from

a system relative to which the centers were in motion. If the definition of

simultaneity is given from a moving system, the spherical surface will result

when Einstein’s definition with  =  is used, since it is this definition which

makes the velocity of light equal in all directions.

The  core  of  the  principle  of  the  constancy  of  the  velocity  of  light,

therefore, is not the assertion that light may be conceived as a spherical wave

for every moving system. This part of the principle expresses only a general

property  of  all  centro-symmetric  processes  of  propagation.  Rather,  the

assertion  that  light  possesses  unique  properties  constitutes  the  physical

content of the principle. We should therefore speak of the principle of the

uniqueness of light. This principle has two parts.

The  first  part  deals  with  the principle  of  the  limiting  character  of  the

velocity of light. According to this principle, light has the highest velocity and

is  identical  with  the  first-signal  defined  in  §  22.  This  statement,  which

belongs to the light-axioms, is not an arbitrary assumption but a physical law

based on experience. In making this statement, physics does not commit the

fallacy of regarding absence of knowledge as evidence for knowledge to the

contrary.  It  is  not  absence  of  knowledge  of  faster  signals,  but  positive

experience which has taught us that the velocity of light cannot be exceeded.

For all physical processes, the velocity of light has the property of an infinite

velocity. In order to accelerate a body to the velocity of light, an infinite

supply of energy would be required, and it is therefore physically impossible

for  any  object  to  attain  this  speed.  This  result  was  confirmed  by

measurements performed on electrons. The kinetic energy of a mass point

grows more rapidly than the square of its velocity, and would become infinite

for  the  speed  of  light.  We  cannot  say  that  this  conclusion  is  logically

necessary. Whether or not physically possible velocities have a finite upper

limit can only be taught by experience. If observation shows the existence of

a  limit,  we  have  to  accept  it,  instead  of  hoping  that  some  day  a  greater

velocity may be found. It is true that science has discovered many things

which  were  never  even  thought  of  before,  but  these  were  mostly  new

discoveries that did not contradict previously established scientific laws. Of

course, such a refutation may occur and then we would have to admit that the

previous scientific “law” was false. This possibility should not prevent us,

however, from believing in scientific laws so long as they are confirmed byexperience.

  Incidentally, the limiting character of the velocity of light can be made

plausible in a very simple fashion. Light represents only a small section of

the  infinite  range  of  electromagnetic  waves,  all  of  which  have  the  same

velocity.  According  to  the  present  state  of  scientific  theory,  the

electromagnetic wave is the archetype of causal propagation. Every other

causal process, e.g., the propagation of elastic forces in a rigid body, or the

flow  of  an  electric  current,  is  reducible  to  elementary  electromagnetic
          76
processes. It seems plausible that a causal process composed of many such

elementary processes should be slower than the electromagnetic propagation;

for instance, the collisions of the individual electrons may cause a retardation;

however, it would be inconceivable that such a compound causal propagation

would be faster. It follows that present-day physics has important positive

grounds for asserting that the velocity of light is the limit of the velocity of all

causal propagation.

The second part of the light principle can be formulated as the principle of

the  metrical  uniqueness  of  light.  It  contains  the  assertion  that  the  natural

geometry of light rays, the light-geometry, is at once the geometry of rigid

rods and clocks. This statement accounts for Einstein’s term “the principle of

the constancy of the velocity of light.” It states that the velocity of light is

constant  even  if  the  space-time  metric  is  defined  by  means  of  rods  and

clocks. Only this formulation makes the principle complete and clarifies its

physical  import.  It  asserts  a  correspondence  between  light-  and  matter-

geometry,  a  formulation  that  makes  the  empirical  nature  of  the  principle

obvious.  Einstein’s  terminology,  however,  may  give  rise  to

misunderstanding. Physics cannot assert that the velocity of light is constant,

since the measure of velocity contains an arbitrary element in the definition

of simultaneity. We can only say that the velocity of light can be defined as

constant without leading to contradictions. The “can,” however, contains a

far-reaching assertion about physical reality, namely, the identity of light-

geometry  and  matter-geometry.  To  speak  of  the  principle  of  the  metrical

uniqueness of light therefore seems to describe the situation more adequately.

  Occasionally,  the  objection  has  been  raised  against  the  relativity  of

simultaneity that Einstein’s definition could just as well have been given by

the use of some other signal, such as sound; this is true. The use of any signal

is justified by the complete relativity of simultaneity, i.e., the possibility ofchoosing for  any value between 0 and 1. We should not believe, however,

that this sound-geometry  has  the  same  unique  characteristics  as  the  light-

geometry. The sound-geometry would not be identical with the geometry of

clocks and rods, nor would it exclude velocities above that of sound. Because

of  the  latter  fact,  simultaneity  as  defined  in  this  case  would  lead  to

contradictions within the causal definition of time order as soon as signal

velocities of a speed higher than sound were used. The special properties of

light are not consequences of the theory of relativity but its presuppositions.

Conversely,  these  empirical  facts  make  the  relativistic  space-time  theory

physically significant, for they make the light-geometry the natural geometry

of physics.

              77
E.  Cohn   has  constructed  a  very  instructive  model  of  the  Lorentz

transformation, which reproduces all its relations correctly and exhibits very

clearly the relativity of simultaneity. The model presents the velocity of light

on  a  reduced  scale,  and  therefore  units  are  chosen  for  the  two  moving

systems which do not coincide if transported into the same state of motion.

These  adjustments  increase  the  illustrative  power  of  the  model,  since  it

demonstrates  the  uniqueness  of  light  in  a  very  effective  manner.  The
                                                        78
epistemological objections raised by J. Petzold  against this model cannot

be maintained.

 

  The  principle  of  the  uniqueness  of  light  is  one  of  the  most  basic

assumptions of the theory of relativity. Its character as a physical and not as

an  epistemological  assumption  must  be  recognized  before  the  space-time

doctrine of the theory of relativity can be judged. Its division into two parts is

also important for the physical theory, since it is only the first, the principle

of the limiting character of the velocity of light, which is taken over into the

general  theory  of  relativity.  The  second  part,  namely  the principle  of  the

metrical uniqueness of light, holds only in the special theory of relativity,

while it is abandoned step by step in the general theory; this will be shown in

§ 38 and §§ 41-42.


§ 33. THE ADDITION THEOREM OF VELOCITIES

  Finally let us investigate the problem of the addition of velocities, which is

solved in the theory of relativity by means of the peculiar addition theorem of

Einstein. If a body has two velocities at the same time, how can these becombined into one resultant velocity? This question is significant because it

also concerns the problem of resolving a velocity into its components; the

combination of the components of a velocity into a resultant is only a special

case  of  the  addition  theorem  in  which  the  individual  velocities  are

perpendicular  to  each  other.  We  must  now  investigate  to  what  extent  the

addition of velocities can be derived logically and to what extent it is a matter

of experience.

First let us state the problem more precisely. What does it mean to say that

a body has two velocities at the same time? Obviously this expression is very

vague. We may say, for example: a body has at one time the velocity  and

2y
at another time the velocity ; what velocity  results if it has both velocities

 
8
at the same time? This question leads back to the first question, since we are

using  the  phrase  “having  at  the  same  time.”  It  is  therefore  preferable  to

reverse the question: a body has a velocity w, and we ask how this velocity

can be resolved into two components.

We  may  proceed  as  follows,  provided  that  we  consider  only  uniform

rectilinear  motion;  all  other  motions  are  reducible  to  this  in  infinitesimal

regions. Let a body move from P to P with a velocity  and then from P
 
                                      011

to P with a velocity  in a different direction. For each of these paths it uses
<l
  2

the same time interval Δt. If we send it another time directly from Po to P
                                                                                          2

with a velocity of w such that it takes the same interval Δt, which it had

previously used for the separate parts of the trip, we say that it has velocities 

E)
 and  at the same time. Now we have given a definition of “having at the

same time,” and we can derive logically the addition theorem for vectors







                                          (1)



In this form the addition theorem is a logical consequence; and at the same

time  it  justifies  the  resolution  of  a  velocity  into  its  components.  The

components of the velocity are defined in terms of the total velocity in thesame way as the individual velocities  and  were defined in terms of w.

®)
1
<
&
The law of the components of a velocity, which is a special case of (1), is

therefore purely a matter of logic.

We can also give the expression “having at the same time” a completely

different meaning which has a direct physical interpretation. For this purpose

we use an auxiliary system K′; the system of reference is K. Let K′ have the

velocity  relative to K and let a given body have the velocity  relative to K

=]
′. What velocity  does this body have relative to K? More precisely, how is

its velocity  relative to K computed from  and  ?

8
2]
 
It is immediately obvious that an answer to this question will depend on

the definitions of the measurements of length and of simultaneity in the two

systems K and K′. Let us assume that these two measurements are defined in

a  certain  manner  in K′,  and  therefore,  that  the  body  has  the  velocity 

el
relative to K′. Its velocity relative to K will then be . If we change the

8]
definitions for the two measurements in K′ and consider a body which now

has  the  velocity   relative  to K′,  this  body  will  have  a  state  of  motion

different from that of the first and it will therefore have a different velocity 

 relative to K. Consequently its velocity  must be calculated differently,

in terms of  and , from the velocity  of the first body. We can therefore

L
g
give an addition theorem corresponding to the second meaning of “having at

the same time” only if we state how length and time measurements are to be

performed in K and K′.

It can easily be shown how these measurements have to be performed in

order to obtain addition theorem (1). For this result we must require:

 

1. Simultaneity and the measure of time in K′ are to be defined so that

    every clock in K′ always shows the same time as that clock in K which it

    is passing at that moment. In other words: the time of K′ is identical with

    the time of K.

2. The length of a distance l′ in K′ is to be measured by that distance l of K

    which is the projection of l′ on K on the basis of the simultaneity of K. In

    other words: the measurement of length in K′ is identical with that of K.It can easily be seen that the vector-addition theorem (1) follows logically

from these conditions, since they define the so-called Galilei-transformation







 

Xy = Xatttd =123

 
                                          (2)



                                                                                        79
in which the components u of  are defined according to the above rules.
=}
                              α

The problem is essentially different for the relativistic theory of space and

time. It defines the measure of time, simultaneity, and the measurement of

length  in K′  in  a  different  fashion,  requiring  that  the  relativistic  light-

geometry  be  established  in K′  as  well  as  in K.  Since  this  requirement  is

equivalent to the use of the Lorentz transformation for the transition from one

system to the other, we obtain a different addition theorem for the relativistic

light-geometry. This theorem is derivable from the Lorentz transformation;

and  we  shall  present  it  here  for  the  simple  case  where   and   are
              80
equidirected:








utv
o Y

1+%
                                          (3)



Like additional theorem (1), this theorem is logically necessary, but it rests

on different assumptions.

We may also consider this addition theorem as an empirical result, if we

define the metric in K′ not light-geometrically, but with the aid of clocks and

rigid rods. Then (3) states: if lengths and time intervals are measured in K and

K′ by the same kind of natural clocks and rods, and if simultaneity is defined

for  both  systems  according  to  Einstein’s  formula  (1,  §  19),  then  additiontheorem (3) holds for the second kind of definition of “having at the same

time” two velocities. This is obviously an empirical law, since it concerns

clocks and rods the behavior of which cannot be determined a priori. On the

other hand, it is clear that this law has no other empirical content than that

expressed  by  the  correspondence  between  light-geometry  and  matter-

geometry. With this formulation we have exhausted the empirical content of

the relativistic kinematics as far as concerns measuring instruments.

  Finally, retaining the second meaning of “having at the same time” two

velocities, we can give the addition theorem another interpretation by using

the following rule for the measure of velocity in K′. Let us erect in K  a

mechanism that would give a body the velocity  if it were fired in K, e.g., a

=t
cannon with a certain powder charge. If this cannon is transported to K′ and

fired, then we say that the shell has the velocity relative to K′. Since K′

-
=
moves with the velocity  relative to K, how can  be calculated from  and 

el
82l
el
 ? The velocity in K′ is not defined by clocks and rods, but by the transport

of a firing-mechanism. Therefore the question arises: to what definition of the

space-time metric in K’ does this arrangement correspond?

  Relativistic  mechanics  claims  that  this  arrangement  corresponds  to  the

relativistic  definitions  for  measurements  in K′,  while  classical  mechanics

claims that it agrees with those definitions for measurements in K′ determined

by conditions (1) and (2) above (p. 207). These are two entirely different

assertions about the world. The theory of relativity states that under the same

physical conditions in K′ the same velocity will be produced relative to the

relativistic metric, while the classical theory maintains that the corresponding

velocity is the same only if the measurements in K′ are performed according

to rules (1) and (2). For the theory of relativity, the relativistic metric of K′ is

the normal system.

This analysis supplies additional empirical content for (3); the composition

of velocities that are produced by a series of physical mechanisms satisfies

the  addition  theorem  (3).  For  this  reason  a  repeated  operation  of  firing

mechanisms will never produce the velocity of light, although each firing

from an already moving mechanism will increase the velocity. The velocities

will approach the velocity of light asymptotically; this result can be inferred
                                    81
from (3) by simple calculation. 

The last assertion goes beyond relativistic statements about space and timein  the  narrower  sense,  and  leads  into  relativistic  physics;  the  principle  of

relativity therefore contains statements not only about space-time measuring

instruments but also about all physical phenomena in general. The pursuit of

this aspect of the theory of relativity does not lie within the scope of this

book, which is restricted to the problems of space and time.


B. Gravitation-Filled Space-Time Manifolds


§ 34. THE RELATIVITY OF MOTION

  Considering now the problem of motion, we turn to a treatment of the

problem  of  space  which  is  historically  speaking  much  older  than  the

geometrical treatment of the problem. Whereas the latter approach developed

only after the invention of non-Euclidean geometry in the beginning of the

19th century, the relativity of motion had already attracted attention at the

time of Newton and Leibniz. Even at that time there was a dispute between
                                                                              82
relativists and antirelativists, and the well-known correspondence  between

Leibniz  and  Clarke,  a  follower  of  Newton,  became  the  talk  of  the  day.

Whoever reads those letters today finds in them many of the arguments and

objections  which  are  known  from  modern  discussions  of  the  problem  of

motion.

That the relativity of motion was defended at such an early date is due to

its conspicuousness. Motion is change in position; it is clear, however, that it

cannot be observed unless it is a change in position relative to a certain body

and  not  relative  to  an  ideal  space  point.  Is  it  meaningful,  under  these

circumstances, to speak of absolute motion or of motion relative to space, if

motion  relative  to  other  bodies  only  can  be  observed?  The  distinction

between what is observable and what exists seems reasonable at first, but

becomes very doubtful on closer inspection; there is a strong feeling that it is

meaningless  to  postulate  differences  in  objective  existence  if  they  do  not

correspond to differences in observable phenomena. Leibniz expressed this

idea in his principle of the identity of indiscernibles, from which he derived a

theory of the relativity of motion, which even today forms the basis of the

theory of relativity. According to this principle there exists only a motion of

bodies relative to other bodies, and it is impossible to distinguish one of these

bodies as being at rest, because rest means nothing but rest relative to another

body,  i.e.,  rest  is  itself  a  relative  concept.  We  shall  call  this  conceptionkinematic relativity. Motion as a kinematic process, as a change in spatial

distances, is relative, since all kinematically observable phenomena are the

same whether one or the other of two bodies is assumed to be at rest. The

cosmologies of Copernicus and Ptolemy are kinematically equivalent; both of

them  are  descriptions  of  the  same  facts,  and  Ptolemy’s  epicycles  of  the

planets are the kinematic equivalents of the circular orbits of Copernicus.

  Even  this  early  discussion  of  the  problem  of  motion,  however,  deals

already  with  another  kind  of  question,  namely  the dynamic  problem  of

motion. It was Newton, the father of mechanics, who introduced criteria of

motion  other  than  kinematic  ones  into  the  discussion.  Discovering  the

quantitative  relation  between  motion-producing  forces  and  a  kinematic

magnitude,  the  acceleration,  he  could  in  turn  use  force  as  a  measure  of

acceleration, i.e., the state of motion. Newton therefore denied the relativity

of motion. According to him it is not true that all observable phenomena are

the same regardless whether we consider one or the other of two bodies as

being at rest, because differences appear as soon as dynamic phenomena are

included  in  the  observations.  The  measurement  of  the  effect  of  a  force

therefore permits the determination of a state of motion relative to space. This

leads Newton to the concept of absolute space which “in its own nature,

without  relation  to  anything  external,  remains  always  similar  and
              83
immovable.”  He certainly recognized the difficulties involved in speaking
                                                                                        83
of such an unreal structure whose “parts cannot be sensually perceived” ;

but with his basic law of dynamics




                                                    Force = Mass × Acceleration




he was able to indicate other means to determine motion relative to space and

at the same time the state of absolute space itself. If we observe the relative or

“apparent”  motion  of  an  observable  body,  i.e.,  its  motion  relative  to  the

observer,  and  measure  the  effective  force,  we  can  calculate  the  absolute

motion of the body. With the aid of the laws of dynamics we can therefore

determine the state of motion of the unobservable absolute space in terms of

observable phenomena.  Newton  developed  these  ideas  mainly  with  reference  to  rotation.  If  we

imagine a rotating disk in empty space, then it is kinematically impossible to

determine its state of motion. This is possible, however, as soon as we take

account  of  dynamic  phenomena.  An  observer  located  on  the  disk  could

measure a centrifugal force k, i.e., the pressure that drives a body fastened to

the disk toward the rim, and calculate from it the velocity of the rotation by
                      2
the formula k = mwr. Newton demonstrated in a very ingenious fashion how

one could also determine the direction of the rotation. Carrying through his

idea for our example, let us imagine a second smaller disk in the center of the

first, rotating relative to it. On this second disk the centrifugal force will be

greater or smaller depending on whether the two disks rotate in the same or in

opposite  directions.  That  direction  of  rotation  of  the  second  disk  which

causes an increase in the centrifugal force is therefore also the direction of

rotation of the first disk.

  Newton  distinguishes  consequently  between  the  real  and  the  apparent

motion of a body. This distinction is not always obvious, and Newton regards

it as the task of mechanics to develop methods that allow us to carry through

the distinction between real and apparent motion in all cases. “. . . how we are

to obtain the true motions from their causes, effects, and apparent differences,

and the converse, shall be explained more at large in the following treatise.
                                                  84
For to this end it was that I composed it.”  These concluding words of the

introduction  to  Newton’s  main  work  illustrate  the  contrast  that  may  exist

between  the objective  significance  of  a  discovery  and  the subjective

interpretation  given  to  it  by  its  author.  Whereas  the  physical  system  of

Newton’s  dynamics  has  become  a  basic  part  of  science,  which,  though

transformed by later developments into a higher form of knowledge, will

always be retained as an approximation, his philosophical interpretation did

not survive. It is only by passing through a state of absolutism in the theory

of space, however, that we have been led to the deeper insights we have

today.  Only  by  disproving  the  Newtonian  arguments  were  the  logical

conceptions developed that issued in the general idea of relativity and went

beyond relativistic kinematics to a relativistic dynamics.

  Even  Newton’s  contemporary  opponents,  Leibniz  and  Huyghens,  took

exception  to  his  view.  They  repeatedly  returned  to  the  problem  of

supplementing relativistic kinematics by a relativistic dynamics. Leibniz tried

to reach this aim by rejecting the Newtonian gravitation as an action at adistance and attributing gravitation as well as inertia to the motion of masses

relative  to  the  surrounding  ether.  He  would  argue,  for  instance,  that  the

appearance of centrifugal forces on a disk isolated in space proves its rotation
                                                              85
relative to the ether and not relative to empty space. He furthermore states

expressly the aequipollentia hypothesium, the equivalence of hypotheses, for
                                                                              86
the description of a state of motion even for dynamic processes, without

however giving a mathematic proof. Yet his philosophical system led him to

limit his dynamic relativity, for he wrote to Huyghens: “that to every object

there corresponds a certain amount of motion, or, if you wish, force, in spite

of the equivalence of the assumptions.” He believes that for every motion

there is some unique subject from which the motion originates, and comes to

the  conclusion  “that  there  is  more  in  nature  than  what  geometry  can

determine, and this is not the least of the reasons which I use in order to

prove that besides extension and its various aspects, which are something
                                                                                          87
purely geometrical, we must recognize something higher, namely a force.”

Therefore  we  cannot  regard  Leibniz’  views  as  a  consistent  theory  of  the

relativity of motion. He was unable to refute Newton’s arguments. Neither

was  Huyghens  able  to  refute  them,  although  he  found  a  very  interesting

interpretation  of  the  centrifugal  force,  which  however,  can  no  longer  be
            88
maintained.

 

 

It was Ernst Mach who discovered the argument that can be constructed

against Newton’s theory of centrifugal force and which leads to a relativistic

dynamics. Mach deals with the pail experiment described by Newton. A pail

half full of water is suspended by a rope and is put in a state of rotation by

twisting the rope. In the beginning the pail will not drag along the water, but

will rotate alone. Gradually, however, it will drag along the water, and the

surface of the water will assume the well-known hollow shape, which is due

to centrifugal force. When the pail is stopped, the water continues to rotate

and retains its parabolic surface. Newton concludes that the centrifugal force

cannot  be  explained  by  a  relative  motion,  since  a  relative  motion  exists

between the pail and the water at the beginning as well as at the end of the

process, while the centrifugal forces appear only at the end. If the pail rotates

while the water is at rest, there is no centrifugal force. If, however, the water

rotates while the pail is at rest, there exists a centrifugal force.  Mach replies that Newton overlooked the fact that the surrounding masses

of the earth and of the fixed stars have to be taken into consideration. The

water  rotates  not  only  relative  to  the  pail  but  also  relative  to  these  large

masses, which may be considered as the cause of the centrifugal force. The

centrifugal force therefore does not indicate a rotation relative to absolute

space,  but  only  a  rotation  relative  to  the  masses  of  the  universe.  If  we

consider the water with its hollowed surface as being at rest, then the earth

and the fixed stars rotate around the water. In this conception the centrifugal

force is a dynamic gravitational effect of rotating masses.. Such a force of

traction originating in the rotation of masses can very well be conceived. A

moving electric charge—as Einstein argued later—produces forces that do

not exist when the charge is at rest.

 

  What is new in Mach’s interpretation is the idea that the inertial force can

be interpreted in the relativistic conception as a dynamic gravitational effect.

Relativity  can  be  extended  to  dynamics  if  forces  are  reinterpreted

relativistically. The same force that affects a body K as the result of the
                                                                1

rotation of K according to one interpretation, affects it according to the other
            1

interpretation as the result of the rotation of K. We thus arrive at a complete
                                                      2

reinterpretation of the concept of force (although Mach was not fully aware

of  it).  Forces  are  not  absolute  magnitudes,  but  depend  on  the  coordinate

system. In physics there are both kinds of magnitudes; electric charge and

entropy are invariants, i.e., magnitudes independent of the coordinate system;

velocity  and  acceleration  are covariants,  i.e.,  depend  on  the  coordinate

system. With Mach’s solution of the problem of rotation, the gravitational

field  is  deprived  of  its  absolute  character  and  recognized  as  a covariant

magnitude which varies with the state of motion of the coordinate system.

This  result,  which  represents  the  most  significant  aspect  of  Mach’s  view,

expresses  for  the  first  time  the  basic  idea  of  the  principle  of  general

covariance.

 

  Mach  draws  a  very  interesting  conclusion  from  his  considerations.  Not

only the large masses of the heavenly bodies, but also smaller masses, must

have  dynamic  gravitational  effects,  though  to  a  correspondingly  smaller

degree. If we were to give the walls of the Newtonian pail a thickness of
              89
several miles, then its rotation around the stationary water would produce ahollowing of its surface similar to that of the rotating water, but of a smaller
                                                                                90
degree.  This  idea  was  tested  later  experimentally  by  Friedländer  on  the

flywheel of a rolling mill, which should produce in the neighborhood of its

axis  a  centrifugal  field  that  would  affect  bodies  not  participating  in  the

rotation of the wheel. The effect was not demonstrable, however, as it fell

below the limit of accuracy. Yet Mach’s claim is retained in the modern

theory of relativity.

This consequence of the ideas of Mach shows, on the other hand, that the

dynamic relativity of motion is more than a philosophical principle, since it

leads  to  observable  consequences.  Although  these  consequences  appear

reasonable, we cannot say a priori whether they will be true, since this can

only be decided by an experiment. We must therefore investigate Mach’s

solution of the problem of rotation in more detail.

Let us consider two world-systems (Fig. 36), each of which consists of an

earth E and E and of a fixed star shell F and F, respectively. The two
        1212

systems are a great distance apart, but light signals can be sent back and forth

to determine their relative states of motion. Let us now assume the state of

motion  to  be  as  follows,  using  one  or  the  other  of  the  following  two

interpretations for its description (the axis of rotation is the dotted line):



  Interpretation I:    E rotates, F is at rest
                          11  

  E is at rest, F rotates
                          22  

  Interpretation II:    E is at rest, F rotates
                          11  

  E rotates, F is at rest.
                          22   
                Fig. 36. Illustration of the problem of rotation.



These  two  interpretations  are kinematically  equivalent.  Are  they  also

dynamically equivalent? Mach’s theory asserts that they are, but it actually

says  more  than  that.  According  to  the  theory,  it  must  be  true  that  if

centrifugal forces appear in E then centrifugal forces must also appear in E,
                                  12

since both earths are in a state of motion relative to their respective fixed

stars. This is an empirically verifiable assertion. Let us assume that it is not

satisfied and that centrifugal forces appear in E alone. Does this disprove
                                                          1

dynamic relativity?

 

The example we have constructed corresponds to the theory of Newton,

and  Newton  would  say  that  it  compels  us  to  accept  interpretation  I  and

establishes absolute space. Closer examination will show, however, that this

claim  is  exaggerated;  interpretation  II  can  also  be  carried  through

dynamically.  Interpretation  I  states  dynamically  :  if  E  rotates  relative  to

absolute  space  then  centrifugal  forces  will  appear.  Therefore  there  are

centrifugal forces in E and not in E. Interpretation II states on the other
                          12

hand: if the fixed star shell F rotates relative to absolute space, it produces

dynamically a gravitational field in E. There are therefore attraction forces in

E and not in E. The inferred state is the same in either case and therefore
12

neither interpretation is dynamically incorrect. We find that if the conditionsare realized which were assumed by Newton, there exists absolute space, but

its state of motion cannot be determined.

 

We obtain the following result. Mach’s idea (Mach’s principle in the wider

sense)  of  considering  mechanical  forces  as  covariant  magnitudes,  to  be

interpreted  as  inertia  or  dynamical  gravitation  according  to  the  state  of

motion of the coordinate system, permits the application of dynamic relativity

under  all  conditions.  However,  it  does  not  exclude  absolute  space.  This

exclusion is accomplished only by a further assertion, Mach’s principle in the

narrower sense, connecting the appearance of centrifugal forces exclusively

with the relative motion of masses, excluding therefore the state described

above  and  requiring  centrifugal  forces  in E  as  well  as  in E.  But  this
                                                      12

principle is undoubtedly empirical.

  Mach’s  (and  also  Einstein’s)  relativity  theory  of  dynamics  is  based

therefore on the superposition of two principles, one epistemological and one

empirical. The epistemological principle states that every phenomenon is to

receive the same interpretation from any given moving coordinate system.

The observable phenomena therefore do not single out any state of motion.

The empirical principle states that all physical phenomena depend only on the

relative position of bodies and not on the positions of these bodies in space.

Two similar systems differently oriented in space must therefore show the

same physical phenomena.

  Even though attempts were made to assign a purely formal meaning to the

relativity theory of dynamics according to which the relativistic interpretation

describes reality, but has no claim on truth, such an untenable distinction

misunderstands the significance of the Mach-Einstein theory. The relativity

theory  of  dynamics  is  not  a  purely  academic  matter,  for  it  upsets  the

Copernican world view. It is meaningless to speak of a difference in truth

claims of the theories of Copernicus and Ptolemy; the two conceptions are

equivalent descriptions. What had been considered the greatest discovery of

western  science  compared  to  antiquity,  is  now  denied  its  claim  to  truth.

However much this fact may caution us in the formulation and evaluation of

scientific results, it does not signify a regression in the historical development

of  science.  The  theory  of  relativity  does  not  say  that  the  conception  of

Ptolemy is correct; rather it contests the absolute significance of either theory.

It can defend this statement only because the historical development passedthrough both of them, and because the conquest of the Ptolemaic cosmology

by Copernicus gave rise to the new mechanics, which in turn gave us the

means to recognize also the one-sidedness of the Copernican world view. The

road to truth has followed in this case the purest form of the dialectic which

Hegel considered essential in every historical development.

Of course, it would be an overestimation to interpret Mach’s ideas as the

completion of the synthesis. When Mach replied to Newton that centrifugal

forces  must  be  explained  by  means  of  relative  motion  alone,  he  did  not

formulate  a  physical  theory,  but  only  the  beginning  of  a  program  for  a

physical theory which must eventually deal with all mechanical phenomena,

not  only  centrifugal  force.  Above  all  it  must  explain  relativistically  the

phenomena of motion in a gravitational field, e.g., the motion of planets. The

greatest achievement of Newtonian mechanics was that it gave a dynamic

foundation to the Copernican world view. While from the point of view of

kinematics there existed no difference between the universes of Ptolemy and

Copernicus, Newton decided in favor of Copernicus from the point of view of

dynamics. It was only for this particular world description that his theory of

gravitation  offered  a mechanical  explanation.  The  complicated  planetary

orbits of Ptolemy, on the other hand, did not fit into any explanation. If we

wish to establish the equivalence of both world conceptions, we must find a

theory of gravitation sufficiently general to explain the Copernican and also

the Ptolemaic planetary motion as a gravitational phenomenon. Herein lies

the  great  achievement  of  Einstein,  compared  to  which  the  ideas  of  Mach

appear only as preliminary suggestions: Einstein has indeed found such a

comprehensive  theory  of  gravitation;  and  it  is  with  this  discovery,  which

places him on the same plane as Copernicus and Newton, that the problem of

the relativity of motion has been brought to a conclusion.


§ 35. MOTION AS A PROBLEM OF A COORDINATIVE

DEFINITION

Before we continue the development of the theory of gravitation, i.e., the

physical part of the principle of relativity to which we are led by dynamic

relativity, let us add a remark about its epistemological aspects. We are now

in a position to give a rigorous formulation to the philosophical status of the

epistemological  assertions  of  the  theory  of  relativity  on  the  basis  of

previously developed concepts.Why can motion only be characterized as relative? This question leads

again  to  the  concept  of  coordinative  definition;  the  unobservability  of

absolute  motion  indicates  the  lack  of  a  coordinative  definition.  The

customary presentations have not always made this problem clear. If it is

agreed  that  only  relative  motion  is  observable  and  is  therefore  the  only

objective phenomenon, this statement, which is based on the principle of the

identity of indiscernibles, is questionable, because it assumes a metaphysical

character.  If  we  cannot  recognize  a  difference,  does  it  mean  that  there

actually is no difference in the objective phenomena? This view overlooks

the fact that purely logical considerations are involved. The question which

system is in motion is not a defined question, and therefore no answer is

possible. We are not dealing with a failure of knowledge but with a logical

impossibility;  the  two  conceptions  which  we  are  to  distinguish  cannot  be

formulated meaningfully, and consequently an answer that decides for one of

them would be meaningless. To ask for the state of motion of a body is

possible only if we have previously defined which system is to be the rest

system; a coordinative definition of rest must therefore be given before we

can even ask a question about a state of motion. This statement explicates the

phrase “the relativity of motion.” We found in § 33 that this relativity, which

depends on the arbitrariness of a coordinative definition, applies even if the

dynamic relativity of Mach cannot be carried through and the dynamic effects

depend on the orientation of the coordinate system in space. The problem of

motion therefore leads to the discovery of a new coordinative definition for

space  in  addition  to  the  coordinative  definitions  for  unit  length  and  the

comparison of lengths, namely, the coordinative definition of rest.

It is for this reason that the idea of simplicity cannot be used to decide

between  the  Ptolemaic  and  Copernican  conceptions.  The  Copernican

conception is indeed simpler, but this does not make it any “truer,” since this

simplicity is descriptive. The simplicity is due to the fact that one of the

conceptions employs more expedient definitions. But the objective state of

affairs is independent of the choice of definitions ; this choice can result in a

simpler description, but it cannot yield a “truer” picture of the world. That

these definitions, e.g., the definition of rest according to Copernicus, lead to a

simpler description, of course expresses a feature of reality and is therefore

an objective statement. The choice of the simplest description is thus possible

only with the advance of knowledge and can in general be carried through

only  within  certain  limits.  One  description  may  be  simplest  for  somephenomena while a different description may be simplest for others; but no

simplest description is distinguished from other descriptions with regard to

truth. The concept of truth does not apply here, since we are dealing with

definitions.

By basing the relativity of motion on the need for a coordinative definition,

we arrive at a more fundamental relativity. The coordinative definition of rest

for  an  entire  coordinate  system  is  generally  not  accomplished  by  mere

reference to a small region. Such a definition would presuppose the concept

of rigid bodies, which permits the restriction of the definition of rest to the
                                    91
state of motion of three points, which would then determine the state of

motion of the entire system. In general, however (i.e., if rigid bodies are not

referred to), we must define a special state of rest for each point. We can then

define an entire point system as a rest system even if its individual points

change their mutual distances by comparison with rigid bodies. For example,

if we define a rubber band which is stretched (in the customary sense) as

being at rest, this definition will never lead to contradictions. The preference

for the definition of rigidity in terms of rigid bodies is based again merely on

descriptive  simplicity.  In  order  to  understand  this  procedure,  it  may  be

remembered that the use of rigid bodies enables us to define the unit length in

terms of a single space point and to extend it to other space points by the

transport of rigid rods. The same procedure is applicable to the definition of

rest in terms of three points in space; rest at other points in space is then

defined in terms of rigid-rod connections with the original three points. This

particular kind of definition is, of course, not logically necessary.

The result attained by Mach and the earlier relativists has sometimes been

formulated by saying that only the relative motion of the earth and stars, not

their individual motions, is an objective fact. Our present considerations force

us, however, to go one step further and assert a relativity of relative motion.

Using a crude picture, let us consider the earth as attached to the fixed stars

by rubber bands. We can now define the continually stretching rubber bands

as being at rest, and in this manner transform away the relative motion within

the earth-star system. Therefore even this relative motion is not an absolute

fact; it applies only to certain specific coordinate systems, namely those that

can  be  realized  by  rigid  bodies.  If  we  therefore  speak  of  an  “objectively

recognizable”  relative  motion,  this  can  only  mean  a  relative  motion  with

respect to rigid bodies as defining relative rest.To clarify this situation, let us use an example chosen for simplicity from

the two-dimensional domain. In an inertial system K of finite extension—we

may think for instance of a Newtonian inertial system—let the normal space-

time measurements be defined according to Einstein. Let us imagine radii r

drawn from a point P, which cover the plane in all directions (Fig. 37) and
                        1

moving points P′ on every



















 
      Fig. 37. An expanding point system that can be defined as rigid.



point P of this plane. Let us assume that all these points P′ begin to travel

along their respective radii away from P at the same time t = 0 (defined in K
                                              1

in the sense of Einstein’s definition of simultaneity). The velocity v of each

point is uniform and v = r q, where q is a general constant and r the distance
                            00

of the point P at the time t = 0. The equation of motion of each point is
                1

therefore given by






 
                                          (1)Points lying on a circle around P at the time t = 0 will always have the same
                                      1

velocity,  but  points  lying  on  larger  circles  will  move  away  with

correspondingly higher velocities, so that the distances between the circles as

well as their circumferences are continually increasing. Only the point P′,
                                                                                          1

which lies on the point P, will remain at rest (r = 0). The points P′ therefore
                            10

form an expanding point system when compared with a rigidly connected

system. Yet we can define the system of the points P’ as being internally at

rest; then we have defined away the relative motion of the points P′. System

K of the points P which was previously called rigid, is no longer rigid; its

points move towards P. This system K is therefore rigid only if we use rigid
                          1

bodies for our definition of rigidity.

The  chosen  example  has  another  peculiarity.  System P′  was  chosen  to

show quite normal properties if the light-geometry is applied to it. We can

define a time measure for a clock at P such that the time  remains
P P'P,
                                              1

constant for light signals from P, although P′ travels away from P when
                                      11

viewed from K. System K′ will then satisfy the light-axioms IV, 1 and IV, 2.

We can also define the light-geometric measure of space so that the distance

between any two points P′ remains constant, although it constantly increases

when viewed from K. The only difference these measurements will show

compared to those in K is that the geometry of the system P′ will be non-

Euclidean. It is however static, i.e., independent of time, and it is impossible

to detect from light-geometrical measurements that a relative motion is taking

place  between  these  points.  But  we  may  infer  from  the  non-Euclidean

character of the geometry that we are not in an inertial system and that the

system is not rigid in the sense of Euclidean light-geometry, especially not in

the  sense  of  matter-geometry.  We  therefore  have  in  the  class  of  systems

determined by the light-axioms I—IV a more general definition of rigidity. It

is clear, however, that even these systems are special cases and that a system

of differently expanding points can also be defined as being internally at rest.
                                                            92
We are again dealing with nothing but a definition.


§ 36. THE PRINCIPLE OF EQUIVALENCE

We  now  turn  to  the  consequences  of  dynamic  relativity,  which  goes

beyond  the  epistemological  relativity.  For  this  purpose  we  must  analyze

Einstein’s  theory  of  gravitation,  since  Einstein  adopted  Mach’s  idea  ofdynamic  relativity  and  developed  it  further.  Whereas  Mach  restricted  his

investigations  to  rotation,  Einstein  applied  the  principle  to  all  kinds  of

motions; consequently his formulation is superior. He was able to give this

general  formulation  by  transforming  the  ideas  of  Mach  into  a  differential

principle.

  Einstein expressed his principle of equivalence in the form of a thought

experiment. Let a mass m be suspended by a spring in a closed compartment

such  as  an  elevator  (Fig.  38).  A  physicist  in  this  compartment  observes

suddenly  that  the  spring  expands.  He  can  easily  verify  this  expansion  by

using a measuring rod. The increase in the tension of the spring indicates a

stronger pull of the mass m. How can the physicist find the cause of this pull?

He could give two explanations.












            Fig. 38. Equivalence of acceleration and gravitation.



  Explanation  The compartment has received an upward acceleration (in the

I.  direction of arrow b) from some external force. The effect of

                the inertia of the mass m   is therefore a downward pull

                opposite to the direction of the acceleration.

  Explanation  The compartment has remained at rest, but a down ward

II.  directed gravitational field g (arrow g) has arisen and therefore

                exerts a stronger pull on the mass m  .



It is impossible to decide experimentally between these two explanations

inside the compartment. This is still true if we permit the physicist to look out

of a window, since he will observe only kinematic phenomena, and these do

not enable him to decide between the two explanations. It might be objectedthat explanation II requires the appearance of large observable masses below

the  compartment,  but  this  is  true  only  if  static  gravitational  fields  are

assumed.  As  soon  as  we  admit  dynamic  fields  in  Mach’s  sense,  the

gravitational field g can be attributed to a motion of the surrounding masses.

  What is the basis of this indistinguishability? According to Einstein, its

empirical basis is the equality of gravitational and inertial mass. This new

distinction must be added to the usual distinction between mass and weight.

There  are  therefore  three  concepts:  inertial  mass,  gravitational  mass,  and

weight.

The first distinction originated with Newton’s discovery that the weight of

a body depends not only on the body itself but also on the distance at which

the body is located relative to the attracting mass. A mass m (Fig. 39) resting

on a spring balance will exert a different force (measurable by the tension of

the spring, which is indicated by its length) on the support, according to the

distance of the apparatus from the center of the earth. This fact is expressed

by the formula







el
                                          (1)



which resolves the force  exerted by a body on its support into the intensity 

 
o |
  of  the  earth’s  gravitational  field  (the  vectorial  nature  of   is  usually

ignored and it is written “g”) and a proportionality factor m due to the body

itself. The structure of formula (1) is analogous to that of the formula







 
                                          (2)



of electrostatics, where the mechanical force results on the one hand from1
an intensity  , which is independent of the attracted body and characterizes

the field, and on the other hand a proportionality factor e which is interpreted

as  the  electric  charge  of  the  body.  Correspondingly  we  might  call m the
                        1
gravitational charge. This factor m is the gravitational mass of the body,

i.e., the constant that expresses the effect of gravity upon it.











                  Fig. 39. Measurement of gravitational mass.



The  mass  of  the  body  has  also  a  quite  different  effect.  If  a  carriage

supporting the mass m is put in motion on a horizontal plane by the release of

a compressed spring (Fig. 40), then the force of the spring will produce a

certain acceleration which determines the velocity with which the carriage

continues to roll horizontally after the push. The following equation applies

to this relation






i
                                          (3)



                            1 H. Weyl, op. cit., p. 225.

It turns out that in this equation m has the same value as that in equation (1).

This is an empirical statement which we can imagine to be tested as follows.

Assume objects of different materials, which, according to Fig. 39, show the

same compression of the spring and are then pushed, according to Fig. 40, by

a spring under the same tension. It can be shown that the push will give them

equal velocities. This result is not self-evident. It is conceivable, for example,that volume would have an influence on inertia and that among the masses of

equal weights those having a greater volume would receive a smaller velocity

in  the  experiment  of Fig.  40.  This  question  can  be  decided  only  by

experience.










I

 
                      Fig. 40. Measurement of inertial mass.



The  principle  of  the  equality  of  inertial  and  gravitational  mass,  which

incidentally is also the reason for the equality of the velocities of falling

bodies (a body which is more strongly attracted by gravity has to overcome a

correspondingly  greater  inertia)  has  been  confirmed  to  a  high  degree  by

experiments. It is mentioned explicitly by Einstein as an empirical principle

constituting the basis of his principle of equivalence.

The equivalence of inertia and gravity is the strict formulation of Mach’s

principle in the narrower sense. It implies that every phenomenon of inertia

observable in an accelerated system can also be explained as a gravitational

phenomenon; therefore it cannot be interpreted to indicate uniquely a state of

motion. Conversely, we can use the principle of equivalence to transform

away  that  gravitational  field  which  was  considered  an  absolute  datum  in

classical  mechanics.  A  freely  falling  elevator  is  a  system  in  which  the

gravitation of the earth is transformed away. Any object in it when pushed

would  assume  a  rectilinear,  force-free  motion  in  the  sense  of  the  law  of

inertia.

The  possibility  of  “transforming  away”  is  subject  to  certain  essential

restrictions. Generally speaking, we can transform away gravitational fields

only in infinitesimal regions. Let us consider for example the radial field of

the earth (Fig. 41). If we let a rigid system of cells (the dotted lines of the
                                                                                          2
figure) move in the direction of arrow b with an acceleration g = 981 cm/sec,

the earth field will be transformed away in cell a but not in any of the others.We can now make the following statement: for any given small region b we

can always specify for the system of cells an accelerated motion which will

transform away the gravitational field at b. We may therefore say that any

gravitational field can always be transformed away in any given region, but

not in all regions at the same time by the same transformation.
















 
        Fig. 41. Local “transforming away” of the gravitational field.



This principle takes the place of the Newtonian concept of inertial system.
                      93
By inertial system  Newton understands those astronomically determined

systems in which the law of inertia applies, i.e., those systems that move

uniformly relative to absolute space. It can be shown within the framework of

Newton’s theory that one can obtain local inertial systems by transforming

away the gravitational field, although these systems are in a different state of

motion provided that the equivalence of inertial and gravitational mass is

presupposed.  The  gravitational  field,  which  as  such  is  still  present,  is

compensated in these local systems by their acceleration relative to absolute

space and the resulting inertial forces. According to Einstein, however, only

these local systems are the actual inertial systems. In them the field, which

generally consists of a gravitational and an inertial component, is transformed

in  such  manner  that  the  gravitational  component  disappears  and  only  the

inertial component remains. There are, strictly speaking, only local inertial

systems.  The  astronomical  inertial  systems  of  Newton  can  at  best  be

approximations which gradually change in the neighborhood of stars. Only

because distances in space are large compared to the masses of the stars, andbecause the stars have very low speeds, are astronomical inertial systems

possible as approximations.

We must now formulate this idea more precisely. Above all we have to

state exactly what is meant by an “actual” inertial system, which for the time

being has only a more or less intuitive meaning. Let us investigate first how

the local inertial systems result according to Newton. Newton’s equation for

the motion of a mass point in a gravitational field is given by







 
                                                                                        (1)

If we now relate the x-coordinate to a freely falling system, i.e., introduce the

transformation










=24

y=j3

g,z
                                                                                        (2)




then







 
and (1) becomes 
                                                                                        (3)




which is the equation of motion in an inertial system. Within mechanics there

exists no difference between the two kinds of inertial systems, and it would

be a play on words to argue that one or the other of the two is an “actual”

inertial  system.  If  we  take  into  account,  however, extra-mechanical

phenomena,  there  will  be  a  difference: whereas  according  to  Newton  the

astronomical inertial systems form the normal systems for all phenomena,

Einstein maintains that it is the local inertial systems which form the normal

systems. We shall study the resulting difference in the example of the motion

of light.

  According to the Newtonian theory only the astronomical inertial systems

are the normal systems for the propagation of light. Only in them does light

travel in straight lines, while its path is curved in a local inertial system. The

motion  of  a  light  ray  which  moves  parallel  to  they-axis  is  given  in  the

Newtonian inertial system by the differential equation







 
                                          (4)



These equations are valid according to Newton even if there is a gravitational

field, as for example on the surface of the earth. The earth is embedded (for

short intervals of time) in an astronomical inertial system upon which the

gravitational field of the earth is only locally superimposed. With respect to

light,  this  gravitational  field  does  not  exist  at  all.  If  we  now  apply

transformation (2) to these equations, they become 
                                          (5)



Relative to K′, light no longer travels along straight lines, because its x′-

coordinate is no longer a linear function of time.

  According to Einstein, however, the local inertial systems are the actual

inertial systems for all other phenomena. In the case of the light ray, for

instance, the equation of motion must be linear in the local inertial system K′,

and the differential equations must therefore be:








 
                                          (6)



If  we  now  go  in  turn  with  transformation  (2)  to  the  system  K  which  is

stationary on the earth’s surface and consequently at rest in the astronomical

inertial system, the equations will become








                                          (7)



It is relative to this system that light is now curved.

We shall illustrate the train of thought that leads from (6) to (7) by the path

of a light ray; this will bring out the purely kinematic basis of the inference.

Let us imagine a compartment (Fig. 42) at rest on the earth. Relative to the

local inertial system it will perform an upward accelerated motion. Let us

also assume that a light ray enters the compartment through a slit on the left-

hand side. We can now determine its path within the compartment if we

assume that the local inertial system is at rest, and if we construct the motionof the light ray relative to the compartment by superimposing the straight line

path of the light ray upon the accelerated motion of the compartment. The

different consecutive positions assumed by the compartment are indicated by

the square brackets of Fig. 42. The end of the light ray is a little farther to the

right for each successive position of the compartment, corresponding to the

marks on the dotted line. It can now easily be seen that these marks have

different positions relative to the compartment in its various locations. On the

right-hand side we have drawn the same process relative to the compartment

as a rest system and indicated the marks this time in their relative positions in

the compartment. The path of the light ray is therefore a curved line relative

to the compartment. This is a purely kinematic effect. It derives from the fact

that the horizontal motion of the light is uniform, while the vertical motion of

the compartment is accelerated. Since we have started from the assumption,

however, that light travels in straight lines relative to the local inertial system

which  falls  freely  relative  to  the  earth,  we  have  now  arrived  at  the  far-

reaching physical consequence that light assumes a curved path relative to a

system  which  rests  on  the  earth:  there  is  a  curvature  of  light  in  the

gravitational field of a mass center.














 

 
    Fig. 42. Bending of a light ray as a consequence of the principle of

                                      equivalence.



It is irrelevant in this case whether the mass center itself is resting in an

astronomical inertial system, since this inertial system no longer constitutes a

normal system in the neighborhood of the mass center. Indeed, it is no longer

reasonable  to  speak  here  of  an  inertial  system  with  a  superimposed

gravitational  field.  The  astronomical  inertial  system  is  destroyed  in  theneighborhood  of  the  mass  center  and  cannot  be  extended  from  the

surrounding space to the region of the mass field without losing its inertial

character. Its functions have been taken over by the local inertial system to

which it cannot be rigidly attached.

In these assumptions we find the core of the general theory of relativity. It

is a genuine physical principle which, with the inclusion of all nonmechanical

phenomena  in  the  characterization  of  the  local  inertial  system,  states  a

physical  hypothesis  that  goes  far  beyond  the  experience  stated  in  the

equivalence  of  inertial  and  gravitational  mass.  Einstein’s  hypothesis

corresponds  to  a  methodological  procedure  frequently  used  in  physics.

Although  the  hypothesis  does  not  follow  logically  from  the  empirical

evidence  but  claims  much  more,  it  is  assumed  in  the  hope  that  the

observation  of  further  derivable  consequences  will  confirm  it.  After  the

special theory of relativity had formulated the laws of clocks, measuring rods,

the motion of light, etc., for inertial systems, the new hypothesis could now

be formulated by the statement that it is not the astronomical inertial systems,

but the local inertial systems, for which the special theory of relativity holds.

The gravitation-free ideal case required for the special theory of relativity is

therefore not realized in the astronomical inertial systems, but in the local

inertial systems. We may thus speak of the principle of local inertial systems,

which states that the local inertial systems are those systems in which the
                                                94
light-  and  matter-axioms  are  satisfied.  With  this  hypothesis  Einstein

introduces the general theory of relativity, and the special theory of relativity

thus becomes the limiting case of the general theory.

For the sake of completeness, we shall now show how the same inferences

that  lead  to  physical  consequences  regarding  light  also  lead  to  similar

consequences regarding clocks. We shall again consider a kinematic effect

that  results  from  the  accelerated  motion  of  a  clock  relative  to  an  inertial

system, and infer from it an effect in the gravitational field. The kinematic

effect with which we are concerned is the Doppler effect.

Let us first consider the Doppler effect that results from uniform motion

(Fig. 43). Let us assume that an observer is moving in a straight line with

uniform velocity away from U. Whenever the clock U completes a period,
                                    11

it sends out a signal which will reach the observer at increasingly distant

points. The intervals between the various light signals are therefore longer for

the observer than the unit intervals of the clock U which he carries with him.
                                                          2For him clock U runs slower than U. Let us now consider a similar process
                  12

in the case of accelerated motion (Fig. 44). The two clocks U and U are
                                                                            12

connected by a rigid rod, and the system which they form has an accelerated

motion. U again sends signals after each unit period. The first signal leaves
          1

A and reaches U when U has reached A. The second signal leaves U at
12221

B and reaches U at B, etc. The distances AA, BB, CC . . . will become
  122121212

longer and longer, and an observer who moves with U will thus experience a
                                                              2

Doppler effect in the sense of a retardation of U. In either case there is
                                                            1

therefore a retardation of one clock relative to the signals which arrive from

the other clock. Whereas in the case of uniform motion, only one of the

clocks is in motion while the other is at rest, the effect will appear in the case

of accelerated motion even when the two clocks are at rest relative to each

other, provided the rigid system which they form moves as a whole. The

latter case permits reinterpretation in terms of the principle of equivalence.

Two clocks which are at rest in the gravitational field of a mass center are in

an accelerated motion relative to the corresponding local inertial system. Our

consideration will therefore lead directly to the assertion that a gravitational

field produces a retardation of those clocks which are located in regions that

have a higher absolute value of the gravitational potential. In the case of atom

clocks, there would be a red shift of the spectral lines, because a retardation

of the frequency manifests itself as a shift of the wave-length in the direction

of the red end of the spectrum.            Fig. 43. Doppler effect as a result of uniform motion.

















]

blg
U,
          Fig. 44. Doppler effect as a result of accelerated motion.



It  should  be  noted  that  this  effect  is  independent  of  the  retardation  of

clocks discussed in § 30. We have used for its derivation nothing but the

Doppler effect. The Doppler effect was also known in the classical theory of

time, which does not include however the retardation of clocks discussed in §

30. The retardation of clocks in a gravitational field must therefore occur if

the principle of equivalence alone is correct, regardless whether there is an

Einsteinian retardation of clocks for uniform motion. This latter effect shows

only  in  the quantitative  calculations  of  the  retardation  of  clocks  in  a

gravitational field, where it appears as a small correction factor.

 

This last result is due to the fact that the Doppler effect can be calculated

as the superposition of two effects, namely, the classical Doppler effect and

the Einsteinian retardation of clocks. Conversely, we can recognize from this

result that the Einsteinian retardation of clocks in uniform motion has nothing

to do with the Doppler effect.

 

The bending of light and the retardation of clocks are direct consequences

of  the  principle  of  equivalence,  and  they  demonstrate  very  clearly  the

hypothetical character of the principle since they are empirically confirmablephenomena. The third of the so-called Einstein effects, namely the advance of

the  perihelion  of  planetary  orbits,  does  not  follow  immediately  from  the

principle of equivalence, but from Einstein’s theory of gravitation based upon

it, especially from the field equations to be mentioned in § 39.


§ 37. EINSTEIN’S CONCEPT OF GRAVITATION

  Continuing the investigation of the principle of the local inertial systems,

we are led to a concept of gravitation that is much more complicated than that

of Newton.

  According to Newton the gravitational force is given by the expression 


M1y
 ; this formula resulted from the fact that he considered the gravitational

field as superimposed on an inertial system, a conception that enabled him to

measure  and  describe  the  field  in  terms  of  the  coordinates  of  the  inertial

system. The given expression for the gravitational force holds only if the

system of reference is an inertial system. In Einstein’s conception, however,

the gravitational field cannot be measured relative to an inertial system, since

the gravitational field is no longer considered as a phenomenon superimposed

upon the inertial system, but as a region in which there exists no extension of

the astronomical inertial systems. If local inertial systems are sought within

such  a  region,  gravitation  must  be  transformed  away  locally,  and

consequently it is impossible to find an inertial system relative to which a

gravitational field could exist and be measured. Einstein’s gravitational field

must  therefore  be  formulated  without  reference  to  a  unique  coordinate

system.

This  assumption  agrees  with  the  ideas  of  Mach,  who  looked  upon

gravitation as a covariant magnitude, the expression of which transforms with

the coordinate system. In every system of reference deviating from the local

inertial systems, a formulation of the gravitational field must be possible.

Furthermore, no system is distinguished from the others as the one relative to

which we could measure a “true” gravitational force. We must therefore look

for a mathematical expression for gravitation sufficiently “elastic” to achieve

such a general characterization.

A scalar theory of gravitation can no longer accomplish this task. Such a

theory characterizes the gravitational state at every point by a single number,

the potential; and the gravitational force will then be characterized by thepotential gradient which can be calculated for every point from the potential

field; thus no further parameters are required.

The new theory has to accomplish considerably more. Let us take a less

simple system of reference, e.g., a rotating disk. All mechanical phenomena

observable on the disk must be interpretable, according to our principle, as

gravitational  effects.  The  centrifugal  force,  which  increases  with  the  first

power of the distance from the center, might still be represented by a law of

potential,  although  it  would  not  correspond  uniformly  to  the  fundamental

differential equation of a potential field, Δφ = 0, since the center constitutes

an  exception  to  this  condition.  This  force,  however,  is  not  the  only  one

effective on the disk. An observer located on the disk would also notice the

effects of the so-called Coriolis force, which exerts a lateral pull on moving

objects,  for  instance,  the  deviation  to  the  right  of  a  projectile  under  the

influence of the rotation of the earth. The new mathematical expression for

gravitation must be comprehensive enough to account for both the centrifugal

and  the  Coriolis  force,  and  this  task  cannot  be  accomplished  by  a  scalar

potential.

For this reason we have to use a tensor potential, which means that the

gravitational state of a point is no longer characterized by a single parameter,

but by a set of parameters, a system of tensor components, which accounts

for all forces occurring. The simple case of the Newtonian field, in which one

parameter is sufficient, is then contained in the new conception as a special

case. It is reasonable to assume that the Newtonian field can occur only as an

approximation  and  will  never  be  strictly  realized.  That  astronomers  have

managed so far with a single parameter for each point (e.g., in the earth’s

field) is due to the fact that one of the tensor components predominates over

the  others  and  hence  has  been  the  only  one  noticed  so  far.  The  new

expression therefore formulates not only the covariance of gravitation but

also leads to a qualitative and quantitative change of the gravitational field

even  in  “normal”  cases,  which  should  be  noticeable  in  very  precise

measurements. This consideration shows that we are dealing in Einstein’s

theory  of  gravitation  with  a  physical  theory  which  is  suggested  by

epistemological considerations but not derivable from them.

  According to this theory, the gravitational state at a point is best compared

with the state of tension existing, for example, in a beam of a bridge. In every

supporting member of a bridge there is a state of tension producing stresses inthe individual volume elements. This state cannot be characterized simply by

the coordination of a force, i.e., a vector, to every point, but requires a more

complicated formulation. If we assume that the beam is cut along a slanted

plane, the two halves will shift relative to each other, i.e., obey a force. The

magnitude and direction of this motion will depend on the direction of the

plane along which the beam has been cut; each cut, therefore, determines a

specific force. For this reason we cannot determine the state of the internal

stresses at a point by coordinating to it a single vector. The situation is much

more complicated. For each point there are infinitely many such coordinated

vectors,  one  for  each  plane  element  that  passes  through  the  point.  This

situation can be simplified by means of the concept of tensor component. We

do not require infinitely many vectors: it is sufficient to specify three surface.

elements and their corresponding vectors. Then we can calculate the vector

corresponding to any other plane through this point according to the laws of

the  transformation  of  components.  Since  each  of  the  fundamental  three

vectors is given by three components (in a three-dimensional space), the state

of the internal stresses of a beam requires 3x3=9 specifications for each point.

Furthermore,  it  is  shown  in  mechanics  that  these  nine  tensor  components

must satisfy conditions of symmetry which reduce the number of independent

specifications to 6.

The  gravitational  field  must  be  conceived  in  a  similar  fashion.  The

characterization is complicated by the fact that it must also account for the

state of motion of mass points. A mass point carried by a gravitational field

does  not  remain  at  rest,  like  the  volume  elements  of  the  beam,  but  falls

“down.”  The  representation  must  also  include  changes  in  time,  and  the

gravitational field, therefore, is characterized by a space-time tensor, not by a

space  tensor.  Such  a  space-time  tensor  has  4  ×  4  =  16  and  not  3x3=9

components. These can be reduced, as before, to 10 independent numerical

terms, because of conditions of symmetry. To make the analogy with the

beam  complete,  we  have  to  use  the  Minkowskian  four-dimensional

representation, in which the state of a mass point at rest is represented by a

vertical straight line, the world-line of the point. Under the influence of a

tensor field this straight line will bend just like the beam of a bridge, but such

a curved world-line is that of a point in motion. For this reason the motion of

a point can be characterized by a tensor field.

The  concept  of  weight  will  also  be  subject  to  certain  changes.  InNewtonian  mechanics,  weight  results  from  the  single  gravitational  force

which pulls the body down at all points. In Einstein’s mechanics, on the other

hand, the body is in a “state of stress” due to the gravitational field; it is

subject  to  tension  and  compression  in  all  directions.  These  may  now  be

combined  in  a  resultant  which  we  call  the  weight.  Newtonian  mechanics

knows only this resultant.

  Conversely, the given presentation makes it clear why, through the four-

dimensional  tensor  characterization,  the  gravitational  field  becomes  a

coordinate magnitude, i.e., a quantity varying with the coordinates. We have

characterized  the  tensor  by  its  4  x  4  components  and  not  by  the  infinite

number  of  vectors  of  which  it  is  composed.  If  we  change  the  coordinate

system, we also change to a different set of fundamental components of the

tensor, i.e., among the infinite number of vectors we choose a different set of

fundamental components. In three dimensions this would mean that the three

basic surface elements have been chosen differently. In the four-dimensional

case it includes also the state of motion, since the slanted direction of a rising

world-line indicates motion. The introduction of a coordinate system in a

different state of motion signifies therefore merely the resolution of the tensor

into a different set of components.

This  consideration  leads  to  a  distinction  which  we  have  touched  upon

several times before and which expresses a basic idea of modern science. The

system of the tensor components is covariant, i.e., it has a different numerical

composition for each coordinate system. Yet we express in this fashion a

state that is independent of the coordinate system, i.e., an invariant state. The

tensor as a whole is an invariant magnitude. We can recognize this property

from its representation by means of components, since the components can

be calculated for every coordinate system, if they are known for one. It is

unfortunate that the physical terminology does not reflect this well-defined

mathematical distinction. By “gravitational field” we understand the system

of components of the tensor in each case; this makes the gravitational field a

covariant magnitude. No particular term has been accepted for the invariant

tensor  field  as  a  whole.  It  might  best  be  called  the metrical  field,  in

accordance with some ideas which we shall discuss later; in fact, this term

has  occasionally  been  used  with  this  meaning.  In  this  terminology  the

gravitational  field  is  the  particular  system  of  components  into  which  the

metrical field has been resolved.This representation explains why the gravitational field can be transformed

away. For this purpose, one resolves the metrical field in such a manner that

the  components,  the  gravitational  potentials,  become  independent  of  the

coordinates, i.e., become constants (this is always possible at least for local

regions); then there exists no gravitational gradient. The disappearance of the

gradient is then called “the disappearance of the gravitational field.” There

are actually three concepts involved in this problem: the tensor as a whole or

the metrical field, the particular set of tensor components or the gravitational

field in the wider sense, and finally the particular set of gradient coefficients

of the tensor components or the gravitational field in the narrower sense. The

latter two are distinguished from each other as the concepts of potential and

of gradient and can therefore be distinguished as gravitational potential field

and gravitational gradient field. Only the gradient field can be transformed to

zero, in which case the potential field becomes constant.

In the mathematical representation, the metrical field is given by the tensor

g, the gravitational potential field by the particular set of components g, and
                                                                                    μν

the gravitational gradient field through the Riemann-Christoffel symbols  ,


which are obtained from the  . The  do not form a real tensor, only a

oguy
e

 
Ty
linear  tensor,  and  can  therefore  all  at  once  be  transformed  to  zero  by

nonlinear transformations.

A fourth concept has occasionally been introduced. We set  ,

Eur = Euv+Yur
where  are the normal orthogonal values of the g, and we refer to the 
Euv
Eur
                                                            μν

as the inertial field and only to the γ as the gravitational potential field. The 
                                        μν

[
 may then be considered as the derivatives of the γ, since the  as
guv
                                                                    μν

constants do not contribute to the gradient field. This resolution into inertial

and  gravitational  field  is  an  adaptation  to  the  terminology  of  Newtonian

mechanics, however, and is therefore hardly appropriate.

 

  Finally, we can give an exhaustive formulation of the ideas of dynamic

relativity using the concepts developed above.

For any given coordinate system there exists a certain gravitational field.

For  any  coordinate  system  in  a  different  state  of  motion,  there  exists  a

different gravitational field. If we wish to carry through a general relativity of

all coordinate systems, i.e., a general application of relativity to kinematicallyequivalent descriptions of states of motion, the gravitational field must be

correspondingly  specified  for  every  coordinate  system.  The  coordinate

systems themselves are not equivalent, but every coordinate system with its

corresponding gravitational field is equivalent to any other coordinate system

together with its corresponding gravitational field. Each of these covariant

descriptions  is  an  admissible  representation  of  the invariant  state  of  the

world.


§ 38. THE PROBLEM OF ROTATION ACCORDING TO

EINSTEIN

We shall now investigate the problem of rotation, on the basis of Einstein’s

idea that a special gravitational field has to be assumed for every coordinate

system.

If we consider, on the one hand, the earth as rotating, this motion must be

relative to one of the Newtonian inertial systems which can be introduced as

an  approximation.  Relative  to  this  coordinate  system  there  exists  no

gravitational field, only an inertial field. If we consider, on the other hand, the

earth to be at rest, there must be a tensorial gravitational field relative to a

system of axes to which the earth is rigidly connected. This gravitational field

manifests  itself  as  a  rotational  field,  which  might  be  compared  with  the

rotational  field  of  a  three-phase  electric  current  whose  three  phases  run

through a correspondingly divided coil. Just as such a field whirls iron filings

in its interior, so the tensorial gravitational field moves the fixed stars around

in a circle. The stars will thus move with the same velocities around the axis

of  the  field.  At  the  same  time,  light  rays,  which  are  deflected  in  the

gravitational field like heavy bodies, are rotated. Only the introduction of

such  a  rotational  field  leads  to  the  dynamic  equivalent  of  the  rotating
                                                    95
coordinate system. A number of objections  that have been raised against

this conception will be discussed in the following paragraphs.

1.  The  equivalence  of  rotating  coordinate  systems  introduces  velocities

above the velocity of light. Points of the coordinate system that lie farther out

will  have  increasingly  higher  peripheral  velocities  and  points  which  lie

outside of a circle with radius  (ω is the angular velocity) will therefore

g lo
have a peripheral velocity ωr greater than c relative to the coordinate system.

The planet Neptune will already have a velocity greater than that of light ifwe consider the earth at rest; the fixed stars will have even greater velocities.

This  consequence  appears  to  contradict  a  requirement  of  the  theory  of

relativity.

The conclusion is erroneous, however, since we are here dealing with a

problem  in  the  general  and  not  in  the  special  theory  of  relativity.  In  the
                                                            10
special theory we can maintain the velocity 3 · 10 cm/sec. as the limiting

value because we allow only certain coordinate systems relative to which all

velocities are to be measured. If we admit arbitrary coordinate systems, the
                10
number  3.  10  cm/sec.  can  be  exceeded.  The  limiting  character  of  the

velocity of light, however, can be maintained even in the general theory of

relativity, yet the assertion is formulated differently. Given any two mass

points, light signals will be the fastest connection between them. Light is the

fastest messenger; it moves faster than any other means of communication

from the same place and at the same time. We formulated this property above

with the aid of the concept first-signal. This principle is satisfied even if we

assume that the coordinate system is rigidly connected to the earth. A light

signal  sent  from  the  planet  Neptune  along  a  tangent  to  the  planet’s  orbit

moves faster than the planet itself and will run away from it. Here light has an

even greater velocity, although the planet itself already exceeds the velocity 3
  10
· 10 cm/sec. This value has therefore no significance if completely arbitrary

space-time measurements are admitted.

In addition there results another restriction from the limiting character of

the velocity of light. The system of axes rigidly connected to the earth can

ideally be extended indefinitely, but outside the circle  it is impossible

e o
to realize the axes materially. Outside this circle there can be no material

points which are at rest relative to the coordinate system; in this case, the
                                                            96
coordinate  system  is  no  longer  a real  system.  Neptune  has  its  high

peripheral velocity therefore only relative to ideal rest points, but not relative

to points which can be realized materially. This restriction is due to the fact

that in the immediate neighborhood of Neptune, as at every point, the special

theory of relativity holds in infinitesimal regions. This requirement leads to

an  important  distinction.  Not  all  kinematically  possible  systems  can  be

realized by material structures at rest relative to them. We must therefore

distinguish between real and unreal systems (see § 41).

2. According to the general relativity of rotation, we can consider not onlythe earth but also any given rotating system, e.g., a merry-go-round, as the

rest system. This conception, however, has absurd consequences. The horse,

which  in  the  usual  interpretation  pulls  the  merry-go-round,  must  in  the

second interpretation be able to put the earth, even the universe, in motion by

means of treading, since now the merry-go-round remains at rest. How can

the horse have the strength to do so?

This objection overlooks the fact that, in the relativistic conception, the

rotation of the stars is due to a gravitational rotational field, and not to the

horse. The latter has an entirely different task: it prevents the merry-go-round

from following the rotational field and taking part in the general rotation. We

see  that  even  according  to  the  relativistic  interpretation,  the  horse  has  to

perform a task determined by the mass of the merry-go-round and not by the

mass of the stars. If an elevator glides down slowly and a fly inside crawls

upward so that it remains at the same level relative to the building, it has to

transport only its own mass—it does not have to “push down” the elevator.

3. Even if the horse of the merry-go-round does not need the strength to

rotate the stars, it is still the cause of this rotation, since the rotation of the

stars relative to the merry-go-round begins only when the horse begins to run.

The starting of the horse must therefore be the cause of the rotational tensor

field. A long time, many years, must then pass before the effect of the field

will reach the fixed stars, due to the limiting velocity of causal propagation.

But we know that this is not the case.

This objection is not answered by the remark that velocities above that of

light  are  possible  in  gravitational  fields.  According  to  our  previous

discussion, any effect originating on the earth cannot reach Sirius faster than

a light signal, and light would take a good deal longer than our example

permits. The mistake must therefore arise in a different manner.

The  error  is  due  to  the  fact  that  the  causal  question  has  been  posed

incorrectly. The objection starts from the assumption that we must find a

cause for every change that occurs relative to the coordinate system. This

assumption leads to the consequence that for every change of the coordinate

system there must be a change in the causal chains, and that we must look, in

our example, for a causal chain from the horse to the fixed stars. On this

requirement the causal chain, like the gravitational field, would be a covariant

concept. This consequence, however, constitutes the mistake: the cause-effect

relation  is  not  a  covariant  but  an  invariant  concept.  Changes  of  thecoordinate system will not affect the status of the causal chains; they are

invariant  sequences  which  will  always  connect  the  same  identical  point

events, independent of the kind of description. In our example, the causal

sequence goes from the horse to the merry-go-round and not to the fixed

stars;  and  that  remains  true  if  we  use  a  coordinate  system  for  which  the

merry-go-round is at rest.

If we now look for the cause of the gravitational rotational field, we must

look  for  the  dynamic  equivalent  of  this  field  in  a  kinematically  different

conception, namely the usual one. In this conception the fixed stars are at rest

and determine an inertial field which pervades the entire space and lends

inertia to every moving mass point. The same causal connection applies to

the relativized conception: the inertial field corresponds to the gravitational

rotational field, which again must be caused by the fixed stars. Through their

motion  the  rotating  fixed  stars  produce  a  rotational  field  that  in  turn

perpetuates their rotation. The same relations that represent the inertial field

as an effect of the masses of the stars, represent in the relativized conception

the rotational field as an effect of the masses of the stars. That we speak

sometimes of an inertial field, at other times of a rotational field, is only a

difference in description, not a difference in the facts described. We must

therefore  not  look  for  a  difference  in  these  facts,  if  we  go  from  one

description to another. It is meaningless, therefore, to look for a cause of the

origin of the rotational field at the moment when the merry-go-round begins

to move. If we continue to relate all measurements of space to the merry-go-

round, we must describe the rest of the world in a different language. We are

compelled to do so because of a cause affecting the merry-go-round and not

the rest of the world. With the choice of a different language we do not imply

that anything has changed in the rest of the world, but only that a change has

taken place between the world and our system of reference.

4. A further objection maintains that the rotational field is an “imaginary”

or “fictitious” force field; we cannot demonstrate its real existence, and it is

not  real  like  ordinary  gravitational  fields.  This  objection  is  based  on  a

misinterpretation of covariant concepts. The state of affairs described by the

covariant concept of gravitation can be represented differently in different

coordinate systems. Each of these descriptions presents the objective state in

a  particular  way.  The  totality  of  these  descriptions,  however,  defines  an

invariant situation, whereas one description gives only one component of thesituation,  so  to  speak,  namely,  its  projection  on  a  particular  coordinate

system. Among these components there is no difference with regard to truth.

Just as we can demonstrate the ordinary gravitational field of the earth by

means  of  the  pressure  which  a  body  exerts  on  its  support,  we  can  also

demonstrate the rotational field objectively by means of the centrifugal and

Coriolis forces.


§ 39. THE ANALYTIC TREATMENT OF RIEMANNIAN

SPACES

Before we continue our discussion of the problem of gravitation, we will

insert a section carrying the mathematical treatment of general geometry a

little further. Familiarity with these mathematical methods is indispensable

for an epistemological study of space. It will be seen that the mathematical

development is not as difficult to understand as is commonly believed by the

nonmathematician.

We shall use here the analytic treatment of the problem of space that was

introduced by Riemann and Gauss (§ 2), developing briefly the basic ideas of

their mathematical methods. Let us imagine a plane subdivided by a network

of curves which are numbered. Then we can indicate the position of every

point of the plane by means of the small plane figure in which it lies. Point P

of Fig. 45, for example, lies in the plane figure 4—5/1—2. If we wish to give

its  position  more  exactly,  we  merely  have  to  subdivide  the  mesh  of  the

network further; thus we might estimate its position as 4.7/1.9. The curved

lines form a coordinate system since they supply a numbering of all points in

the plane. And this is all we can demand of a coordinate system. 

 

 

2

 

 
        Fig. 45. Specification of a metric for curvilinear coordinates.



We  ask:  how  long  is  the  diagonal c  of  the  coordinate  cell  under

consideration?  If  we  had  used  rectilinear  orthogonal  coordinates,  as  on

ordinary graph paper, instead of curvilinear coordinates, this question could

be answered easily. Since the coordinates of the endpoints are (5, 1) and (4,

2), their distance is given by







V(E—42+(2—1)2
according to the Pythagorean theorem. This answer, however, does not apply

to  curvilinear  coordinates,  since  these  coordinates  are  nothing  but

identification numbers, like the numbers on houses, and do not refer to a

measure of length. How can we avoid this difficulty?

Let us call the actual lengths of the sides of the coordinate cell a and b;

these two sides together with the diagonal c form a skew triangle. Such a

description considers a and b as straight lines; this approximation becomes

more  accurate  the  finer  the  network.  The  following  calculations  should

therefore  be  understood  to  be  correct  for  the  limiting  case a  = b  =  0.

According to the “extended theorem of Pythagoras” we mav now writec2 = a2+4b2—2ab cos ¢
                                          (1)



If we now let the variable x range over the numbers going to the right and
                                  1

the variable x over the numbers going upwards, then a and b will be in some
              2

relation to the coordinate differences dx = (5—4) and dx = (2—1). They are
                                              12

of  course  not  identical  with  these  coordinate  differences,  since  these

differences  are  derived  only  from  identification  numbers,  not  from  a

measurement of distances. The length of the segment a is not equal to 1 as is

the coordinate difference dx; it is smaller. We must therefore write
                                1







a=adny b =pir
                                          (2)



where α and β are factors. Substituting according to (2) in (1), we obtain






€% = a2dx,2+P%dxe® —2af dxy dxg cos ¢
                                          (3)



in  which α, β  and  cos φ  are  numbers  that  are  characteristic  for  the  cell

containing P. In different cells of the network these numbers would have

different values, while the expression (3) would remain the same. We must

therefore  consider  these  numbers  as  functions  of  the  position.  Using  the

abbreviation@?=gn PB*=ge —afcosd =g =gan
                                          (4)



                  22
and replacing c by ds, we may write (3) in the generalized fundamental

metrical form







ds? = g, dx,dx,

 
                                          (5)



If we let μ and v take on the values 1 and 2 independently of each other, we

have four terms, which together with (4) give us expression (3). Therefore (5)
        97
is a sum consisting of four terms.

The expression ds is commonly referred to as “the line element of the

plane.” The numbers g indicate how, at a given place, the length of the line
                          μν

element is to be calculated from the coordinate differentials. Since the g are
                                                                                    μν

functions of the position, they are to be written as g(x, x). These functions
                                                            μν12

determine the metric. If the g are given for every point of the plane, we can
                                μν

calculate the length Δs for any curvilinear or straight-line segment, if we

know the coordinates of all the points through which the line passes. This

length is equal to the sum of the many ds’s which may be placed along the

line, and therefore







4s :f:ds :jix/gﬁcﬁz
                                          (6)



This mathematical treatment has the following significance. It divides the

function of the customary orthogonal coordinate system into two parts which

are quite different. It  leaves  the  topological  function  of  numbering  to  thecoordinate system, but assigns the metrical function of measuring lengths to

the metrical coefficients g. In this way the mathematical treatment divides
                              μν

the description of a plane into a topological and a metrical part and makes

possible the analytic treatment of the metric.

This  mathematical  achievement  is  of  greatest  significance  for  the

epistemological problem of space. The method shows that in addition to the

metrical  function  usually  associated  with  the  “coordinates  of  the  graph

paper,”  the  coordinate  system  has  an  important  topological  function.  It

consists in the assignment of identification numbers to every point, which can

of  course  be  accomplished  by  curvilinear  as  well  as  by  rectilinear

coordinates. In spite of the arbitrariness of the numbering, something very

important  is  thus  achieved,  since  the  numbering  determines  the  mutual

neighborhood relations. If three points A, B, and C lie along a line so that B

lies between A and C, this fact is determined by the position of the points and

the line, relative to the coordinate system. To give an example: if we know

that in a certain street Mr. X lives in No. 37, Mr. Y in No. 45, and Mr. Z in

No. 61, we also know that Mr. Y lives between Mr. X and Mr. Z. But from

the  given  information  we  know  nothing  about  the  respective  distances

between their houses, since the houses may be located at different distances

along  the  street.  We  speak  of  the topological  function  of  the  coordinate

system because it determines the order of the betweenness relation.In contrast to this important role of the description of a plane, the metrical

function of the g plays a subordinate role. It cannot change the topological
                  μν

foundation  determined  by  the  coordinate  system;  it  merely  adds  to  it  a

metrical superstructure. In this role, however, the form of the g becomes
                                                                              μν

important for what is commonly referred to as the Gestalt of the plane. We

can understand this best through the following mathematical considerations.

In the example of Fig. 45 we began with a plane. This fact is expressed

analytically by a property of the g, as we shall see when we investigate
                                          μν

transformations to other coordinate systems. Let us imagine that a second

coordinate  system  has  been  introduced  and  that  the  position  of  the  new

family of lines is given as a function of the old coordinates, such that we can

write








 
                                          (7)



where the functions f are completely arbitrary. We now add the restriction

that the transition to the new coordinates must not change any of the metrical

relations;  this  transition,  therefore,  leads  only  to  a  different  form  of

description. We must then specify a new system g′ of metrical coefficients
                                                            μν

relative to the new coordinates x′ such that the old relations of congruence
                                      μ

are preserved. If two line segments are equally long when measured by the

old g, in the old coordinate system, they must still be equally long when
    μν

measured by the new g′ in the new coordinate system. This requirement
                            μν

leads to the condition that






 

o A%, A%, = go, dxy dx',

 
                                          (8)                                  2
We can therefore say that ds is an invariant of the transformation, and we

can show from (8) how the new g′ are to be calculated from the old ones.
                                      μν

This  proof  is  not  difficult.  It  follows  from  (7)  that  the  differentials

transform linearly:







                                          (9)



Substituting (9) on the left side of (8), we obtain, using the identity with the

right-hand side:








e Ot O
or = gt .
                                          (10)



(10) is the so-called law of transformation of tensors, and g is therefore
                                                                          μν

called a tensor. This term denotes nothing but a magnitude which transforms

according to (10) when we go over to a new coordinate system.

We are now able to express analytically the characteristic property of Fig.

45,  namely,  that  it  describes  the  relations  of  a plane.  If  we  had  chosen

rectilinear orthogonal coordinates, the line element would be






ds? = dxy2+dxg®
This means that relative to the normal coordinate system the g satisfy the
                                                                            µν

matrix                                          (11)



We  can  now  introduce  the  following  requirement:  since  the  surface

considered in Fig. 45  is  a  plane,  there  must  be  a  transformation  (7)  that

changes the g of the curvilinear coordinates into the normal form (11).
              µν

This requirement expresses a property of the system g. It can be shown
                                                                    μν

that  the  system g  has  this  property  only  because  it  was  constructed
                      μν

originally for a plane. If the construction of Fig. 45 had been carried out on

the surface of a sphere, we would have obtained a system g for which there
                                                                      μν

is  no  transformation  into  the  normal  matrix  (11).  We  shall  study  these

relationships in more detail, because the mathematical development can be

given easily.

Let  us  assume  that  the  four  functions g  are  given.  How  shall  we
                                                      μν

formulate the condition that they are to be transformed into a normal matrix?

This  requirement  obviously  amounts  to  the  demand  for  a  coordinate

transformation (7) satisfying the equations:








oxy Oy, _
ox', ox',H =8&or

 

10
01
                                          (12)



Expression (12) represents four equations for the four partial derivatives of

the functions in (7). The number of variables corresponds to the number of

equations, but since the variables are functions, not numbers, we must add the

Cauchy-Riemann conditions of integrabilityB O
W Ox, OO,
                                          (13)



  Expression (13) represents four more equations, and we have now eight


equations  for  the  four  partial  derivatives Because  of  this

%y
5%
overdetermination, equations (12) and (13) cannot generally be solved.

We  may  restate  our  results  as  follows:  any  given  system g  can  be
                                                                              μν

transformed into another system g′ by means of (7). Transformations of
                                            τ

this  kind,  starting  with  a  definite  set g,  do  not  give  us  all  conceivable
                                                μν

systems, however, but merely a limited class. All systems of this class are

geometrically  equivalent  to  the  initial g,  and  the  class  as  a  whole
                                                    μν

characterizes a definite geometry. Other classes, similarly constructed, would

characterize another geometry. A special class is the class which contains the

normal system (11); it is the class of Euclidean geometry.

The question now arises whether there exists a special characteristic of the

class of Euclidean geometry. Mathematicians have shown that it is possible

to  formulate  such  a  criterion.  For  this  purpose  one  has  to  form  a  certain


mathematical combination of the g,  , and  , which is called R
%8
8%,0%,
                                        μνμντ

and which transforms according to rules analogous to (10). R is therefore
                                                                        μντ

a tensor of rank 4. We can recognize directly from (10) a very important

property of all tensors, namely, that if all components of a tensor are zero in

one coordinate system, they will all be zero in every coordinate system. This

result follows immediately because all terms disappear in the summation of

expression (10). Since it can be shown that R vanishes for the normal
                                                        μντ

system, it follows that every system of the Euclidean class is characterized by

the condition                                          (14)



R  is  called  the  Riemannian  curvature  tensor.  It  is  a  measure  of
μντ
          98
curvature.

One thing can easily be shown: if we restrict ourselves to the requirement

that the g  shall  assume  the  normal  form  (11)  for  one  single  point,  this
          μν

requirement can always be satisfied by a suitable choice of the coordinate

system. The integrability conditions disappear for this limited requirement,


since in this case it is no longer the functions  but their numerical values at

o’
a specific point, which are subject to conditions (12). Thus there exists no

longer an overdetermination. However, the normal system cannot be realized

for all points by means of the same transformation; if we extend a coordinate

system that satisfies the conditions for one point, generally it will not satisfy

these conditions for the other points. In the general case, the system of the g
                                                                                          μν

can therefore be transformed only in infinitesimal domains into form (11) of

the system of the plane. In this way we formulate analytically the property of

curved surfaces, namely, that their infinitesimal elements can be treated as

planes, just as an infinitesimal element of a curve can be conceived as a

straight line. The shape of curved structures differs from the shape of straight

structures only in large dimensions, while their infinitesimal elements have

the  same  form.  This  intuitively  evident  rule  finds  its  corresponding

expression  in  the  analytic  representation  of  the  shape  of  the  surface.

Conversely, the formulation of geometry with the aid of metrical functions

g may be characterized as the extension of the concept of geometry to such
μν

cases in which Euclidean geometry holds only in infinitesimal domains.

  Because of this analytic treatment, it is now relatively easy to extend our

considerations  to  three-dimensional  space  or  even  to  a  manifold  of  an

arbitrary number of dimensions. For three dimensions, we only have to vary

the  index,  in  our  previous  formulae,  from  1  to  3  in  order  to  achieve  an

analytic treatment of space. We owe this method to the genius of Riemann,

who generalized the Gaussian treatment of surfaces. We may refer here to § 2

for  greater  detail.  The  occurrence  of  the  normal  form  of  the g  in  the
                                                                                μν

infinitesimal  domain  means,  for  the  three-dimensional  case,  that  every

Riemannian space is Euclidean in infinitesimal domains. Curved space is thuscomposed of plane differential elements, just like curved surfaces.

To deal with the four-dimensional space-time manifold we require a minor

change, since its metric is of the indefinite type, as we have shown in § 28

and § 29. The normal form of the g then becomes
                                        μν










Soo
com~o
o~oo

~ocoo
                                          (15)



However, this makes hardly any difference in the analytic treatment. The

values in infinitesimal domains now assume, of course, the indefinite form

(15). We can comprise all these formulae by one expression, varying the

index from 1 to 4:







   

uwdx, X, 4y =
                                          (16)







 
                                          (17)



                                          (18)dn, =

oy
i
= 2 e
o = o,
                                          (19)



How are we to ascertain the metric of the four-dimensional space-time

manifold by means of physical measurements? For this purpose we need:

 

1. A coordinate system, i.e., all point events must be numbered.

2. The 10 metrical functions g relative to this coordinate system.
                                    μν


We must now consider this problem from the physical point of view. For the

time being we shall not study the first of these two tasks, but shall simply

assume that such a numbering is given. Pursuing the second task, however,

we shall be led into the theory of gravitation.


§ 40. GRAVITATION AND GEOMETRY

We ended our discussion of the problem of gravitation in § 37 with the

statement that the special theory of relativity can apply only in infinitesimal

domains. We have previously characterized the space-time relations of the

special theory of relativity by the fact that the geometry defined by clocks,

measuring rods, and light assumes the indefinite type metric in the special

form of (1, § 29). In the general case this geometry holds only in infinitesimal

domains; a more general geometry, of the kind developed in the previous

section and characterized by a system of g, holds for gravitational fields.
                                                μν

In order to carry through this idea, let us recall the example of the curved

surface. If human beings live on a curved surface the geometry of which they

want to determine, they must first introduce a system of coordinates. Their

choice of a coordinate system is not limited by restrictions of a metrical kind.

Let us imagine that they carry around infinitesimal measuring rods which

they use to define the relation of congruence on the entire surface. If they

place a unit rod at a point P, then its ends will determine a certain coordinate

difference dx. If they now combine the dx according to the special formula
              μμ                                                                222
                                                            dx+dx = ds
                                                              12




                        2
then the resulting ds is by no means equal to 1. They would first have to

introduce “correction factors” g, such that
                                    μν







QA dx, = ds?
                                          (1)



becomes equal to 1. This is very easily accomplished; many different choices
                                                                                      2
of the numerical factors lead to this result. If we require, however, that ds be

equal to 1 for the same g and any direction of the rod rotated in P, the g
                            μνμν

will be determined uniquely. We might imagine that the g are found by
                                                                        μν

experiment. The numbers g of the individual points can then be combined
                                μν

into functions.

It is easily recognized that this procedure results in an overdetermination.

If the rod is placed in the direction of the line x = const., then dx = 0 and (1)
                                                      22
                  2
reduces to gdx. Since this expression is to be equal to 1, it will determine
            111

g.  In  the  corresponding  fashion  we  find g,  by  placing  the  rod  in  the
1122

direction of line x = const. If we add one slanted direction, this experiment
                    1

will determine g = g. It must therefore be an axiom, i.e., a matter of truth
                  1221
                                                                                2
or falsehood, that the g thus obtained will satisfy the condition ds = 1 for
                          μν

all positions of the unit rod. This axiom must of course be considered an

empirical  law.  If  it  were  not  confirmed,  we  would  be  left  with  two

alternatives. The first of these makes use of the fact that the axiom is satisfied

only in infinitesimal domains and that therefore every procedure using finite

rods is liable to contain an error. We would assume, therefore, that the unit

rod was not chosen sufficiently small and would claim that the axiom would

be satisfied if the rod were shortened. The g would then have to be treated
                                                    μν

within  the  original  point  region,  not  as  constants,  but  as  functions  of  theposition, and the original length of the rod would be calculated not as ds, but

as ∫ds. Whether this assumption is correct can be decided, since it is possible

to test whether the hypothesis is better satisfied as the rod becomes shorter.

We shall then infer inductively whether the axiom can be maintained in the

limiting case. If it should turn out that the described method is inadequate, a

second alternative would be left. We would have to repeat the above process

with line elements of higher order, since line elements of second order did

not accomplish the task. We might start first with line elements of the fourth

order






dst = gordx,dx,dx.d%,
                                          (2)



We would thus have a greater number of metrical coefficients available and

we could adjust them to a greater number of conditions. The higher the order

of the line element, the more adaptable it will be to the actual conditions in

nature. The fact that line elements of the second order prove to be sufficient

indicates  a  property  of  reality.  It  actually  says  nothing  more  than  that

measuring instruments obey Euclidean geometry in infinitesimal domains.

Here  again  an  empirical  statement  is  to  be  added  to  a  coordinative

definition to guarantee that the definition be unique. However, this fact does

not deprive the coordinative definition of its definitional character; rather, the

determination  of  the g  for  a  given  coordinate  system  is  a  physically
                            μν

meaningful and definite task only if the coordinative definition of congruence

has previously been given. We now have to give an analogous development

for the space-time manifold.

The  coordinative  definition  of  congruence  is  again  given  in  terms  of

clocks, rods, and light, just as in the special theory of relativity. The interval
2
ds, realized by these measuring instruments, will be defined as the unit and

after  a  coordinate  system  has  been  chosen,  the  corresponding g  are
                                                                                    μν

calculated.  We  thus  construct  a  network  of  infinitesimal  unit  widths.  The
                  222
clocks supply ds =—1, the measuring rods ds = + 1, and light ds = 0.Through experiment we discover at every point those numbers g by which
                                                                            μν

the coordinate differentials must be multiplied in order that the interval will

equal 1. The numbers g are again combined into functions.
                          μν

This method is the same as that used in the special theory of relativity,

where we constructed the metric by means of a coordinative definition based

on clocks, measuring rods, and light. However, there the coordinates were

chosen in such a way that the g satisfied the normal matrix (15, § 39). We
                                    μν

showed in § 27 how this choice of the special coordinates is to be carried out.

If  we  now  admit  arbitrary  coordinate  systems,  the  normal  matrix  will  no

longer suffice, and the more general form (1) must be employed.

  Obviously, more than a definition is involved in this procedure. As before,

the system of the g for one point is determined by a certain number (10) of
                    μν

positions of the interval; that the other positions introduce no contradictions

must  be  stated  as  an  additional  axiom.  Since  the  slanted  positions  of  the

interval are equivalent, in the geometrical interpretation, to different states of

motion of the measuring instruments (see § 29), the axiom constitutes an

assumption about the behavior of moving measuring instruments. The axiom

is already partially expressed in the special theory of relativity, where it is

formulated in the matter-axioms and asserts that the measuring instruments of

uniformly  moving  systems  adjust  to  the  relativistic  light-geometry.  In  the

general theory we must extend this axiom to include accelerated measuring

instruments. This extended formulation states that the metrical behavior of a

body depends only on its velocity, not on its acceleration. If, for instance, a

clock in accelerated motion has the same velocity as a uniformly moving

clock at the precise moment when the two pass each other, then the two

clocks will show the same flow of time during this common infinitesimal

period of time.

  Whereas we have so far dealt only with the determination of the space-time

geometry  of  gravitational  fields,  we  shall  now  investigate  an  additional

feature of the theory. It is asserted that the metrical tensor g is identical with
                                                                      μν

the tensor of the gravitational field which we found to be necessary for the

characterization of gravitation (cf. § 37). This conclusion follows directly

from the principle of equivalence.

If we establish a metric at one point in a local inertial system K′, the g′
                                                                                          τ

will satisfy there the normal matrix. If we now describe the same local worldregion from an accelerated system K, the g of this system can no longer
                                                    μν

satisfy  the  normal  matrix,  since  they  will  result  from  the g′  by  a
                                                                                  τ

transformation  which  does  not  belong  to  the  Lorentz  transformations  and

which will therefore destroy the orthogonal form (1, § 29) of the line element.

The g  will  therefore  characterize  the  state  of  acceleration  of  K.  If  they
      μν

characterize  the  state  of  acceleration  of  K,  however,  they  must  also

characterize the gravitational field which exists for K because of the principle

of equivalence. The metrical tensor must therefore also be the gravitational

tensor.

We may clarify this relation in the following manner. If we go from an

inertial system to an accelerated system by means of the transformation (17, §

39), the coefficients of the equation of the transformation will contain the


acceleration a. This magnitude enters through the into the g, and the g
0%’
o,

 
                                                                          μνμν

contain therefore the acceleration a of the chosen coordinate system. And

since,  conversely, a  can  also  be  interpreted  as  the  intensity g  of  the

gravitational field, the g contain also this magnitude, and are therefore a
                            μν

measure of the gravitational state existing for this coordinate system. In a

simple form, this idea is found even in the Newtonian theory: because of the

identity of gravitational and inertial mass, we can identify the gravitational

field g  with  the  acceleration  of  freely  falling  bodies.  Therefore  it  is

unnecessary  to  distinguish  between  the  two  magnitudes,  which  originally

were conceptually distinct.

One might now ask whether this new assertion contains anything factual.

Does gravitation mean more than what is expressed by the metrical function

of the tensors g? It does indeed. Gravitation can also be recognized by the
                μν

appearance of forces, by the bending of elastic beams, and the motion of

mass points (planets). The factual import of the new claim lies in the fact that

the same physical magnitudes that determine the motion of mass points and

the bending of beams also determine the length of rods, the period of clocks,

and the path of light. This assertion is, of course, of extraordinary physical

importance. Since we combine the behavior of measuring instruments under

the concept of metric, and the appearance of forces of the kind mentioned

under the concept of gravitation, we may formulate the new assertion as the

identification of metrical and gravitational field and refer to the field thatpervades  the  entire  space  as  the metrical  field.  This  identification  is  a

consequence of the principle of equivalence.

We must now point out a difficulty closely connected with this result. The

identification just mentioned is based primarily on the fact that the geometry

of the theory of relativity includes the dimension of time. If we interpret the

g which result from the transition from a normal to another system, as the
µν

gravitational field, we think of a transformation of the state of motion. Since

transformations  of  the  state  of  motion  are  not  the  only  coordinate

transformations  of  four-dimensional  space-time  manifolds,  however,  the

identity of the metrical tensor and the gravitational tensor says more than was

originally  expressed  by  the  principle  of  equivalence.  Even  purely  spatial

coordinate  transformations  must  now  be  interpreted  as  transformations  to

new gravitational fields. If we change to three-dimensional polar coordinates,

for  example,  while  the  time  coordinate  remains  unchanged,  the g  will
                                                                                  µν
                                                99
assume a form different from (15, § 39). For these coordinates there must

therefore exist a gravitational field. Pure time transformations which leave

the space coordinates unchanged and therefore do not constitute a change in

the  state  of  motion  but  stand  for  a  redefinition  of  simultaneity,  e.g.,  the

definition of simultaneity given by (1) in § 27, will also cause a deviation of

the g from the normal form and produce a gravitational field. Through the
    µν

identification of the g system with the gravitational field the concept of
                          µν

gravitation receives another, though inessential, extension which goes even

beyond the introduction of dynamic gravitational fields. But in virtue of this

comprehensiveness  the  concept  of  gravitation  becomes  accessible  to  the

mathematical treatment by means of Riemannian geometry.

If we wish to avoid this all too general concept of gravitation, we may use

the concept of the metrical field. All g′-systems derived from a g-system
                                              στµν

by means of coordinate transformations are merely different resolutions of

the same tensor into different sets of components. This tensor, the metrical

field,  is  therefore  independent  of  specific  coordinate  systems.  If  we  now

identify the gravitational field with the metrical field g, polar coordinates and

systems  that  have  a  differently  defined  simultaneity  will  have  the  same

gravitational  fields  as  the  system  from  which  they  resulted  through

transformation. We can thus retain the intuitively plausible property of the

gravitational  field,  namely,  its  independence  of  such  coordinatetransformations. This statement means, of course, that we will also have to

accept the consequence that transformations of the state of motion will not

change the gravitational field either, since they too leave the metrical field

invariant. All these difficulties can be avoided if we remember that the earlier

concept of gravitation is now divided into two separate concepts. One of

these is the metrical field, which has taken over from the earlier concept of

gravitation the property of being independent of the coordinate system; the

other is the actual system of components of the metrical field, which has

taken over the remaining properties of the earlier concept of gravitation and

which is therefore commonly referred to as the gravitational field. We should

not be surprised to find that this narrower concept of gravitation refers to

fields  that  cannot  properly  be  subsumed  under  the  earlier  concept  of

gravitation.

We have to pursue our analysis further. Since we are able to show that the

metrical field of space is at once a manifestation of gravitation, there arises

the possibility of asking for a cause of the metrical field. It has not been

customary to ask this question, because the geometry of space has commonly

been  accepted  as  a  fact  requiring  no  causal  explanation.  A  cause  of

gravitation was known, however. Ever since Newton, gravitation has been

looked upon as the effect of masses. To this conception was added Mach’s

idea that the masses are also the cause of inertia. If gravitation and inertia are

now combined to form the field g, one must conclude that the cause of the
                                      µν

field g, and therefore also the cause of geometry, is to be found in the
      µν

distribution of masses, and that there must be a law of nature stating how the

g field is related to the distribution of matter.
µν

In classical mechanics this law is given by Newton’s equation







I

mimg
                                          (3)



or the corresponding differential law 
                                          (4)



the  so-called  Poisson  equation.  It  states  how  the  matter  p  determines  the

gravitational field φ. In Einstein’s theory of gravitation, the tensor field g
                                                                                        µν

takes the place of the scalar field φ, and instead of the scalar mass p we have

the matter tensor T which represents the density of mass as well as the
                      µν

internal tension of matter. Guided by this analogy, Einstein guessed, so to

speak, at the new law:






Ry —3guwR = —«T,,
                                          (5)



On the left hand side of (5) we find a complicated function of the g, which
                                                                                µν

is  abbreviated  by  the  symbols  “R”  and  “R”;  κ  is  a  constant.  This  law
                                        µν

implies (4) : it states how the gravitational state g is to be calculated from
                                                          µν

the distribution of matter T. Since g, however, also represents the metrical
                              µνµν

tensor  in  contrast  to  the  classical  gravitational  function  φ,  (5)  states

something essentially new compared to (4): it states how the geometry of the

universe is determined by the distribution of matter. Einstein’s field equations

assert therefore a new law of nature, the existence of which was not suspected

before.

  Equation (5) represents the most fundamental idea of Einstein’s theory of

gravitation in the physical as well as the philosophical sense. Let us first

study  its  physical  significance.  Equation  (5)  is  the  key  to  the  previously

mentioned relativity effects: the bending of light and the retardation of clocks

in a gravitational field. Since the behavior of clocks and light is determined

by the g, and since T represents the masses of the stars, these effects can
        µνµν

now be calculated rigorously from (5). The considerations outlined in § 36,

based on the Newtonian theory of gravitation, can at best be approximations.Furthermore, expression (5) implies a change in the physical content of the

law of gravitation. It differs from (4) even if we consider the g only as
                                                                              µν

gravitational functions. This is evident, since in (5) the gravitational field at

each point-is characterized by 10 parameters, whereas in (4) only by one

Relation (5) can therefore contain the Newtonian gravitational field φ only as

an approximation. It can indeed be shown that this approximation is realized

when  all  components  of g,  with  the  exception  of g,  approximate  the
                                µν44

normal form, in which case g = φ. If we were to calculate from (5) a purely
                                  44

gravitational process, e.g., the motion of a mass point around a mass center,

the  result  would  differ  slightly  from  that  calculated  from  (4).  Einstein’s

planetary motion is therefore different from that of Newton; it asserts a slight

rotation  of  the  elliptic  orbit  in  addition  to  the  elliptic  motion.  This

consequence is strikingly confirmed by the advance of the perihelion of the

planet Mercury, a phenomenon that has been known for a long time.

Let us now turn to the question of what is new in the identification of

gravitation  and  metric  from  the  philosophical  point  of  view.  It  has

occasionally been said that this conception deprives gravitation of its physical

character  and  that  gravitation  therefore  becomes  geometry.  We  shall  now

investigate whether this conclusion is justified.

We  have  learned  in  §  6  about  the  difference  between universal  and

differential forces. These concepts have a bearing upon this problem because

we find that gravitation is a universal force. It does indeed affect all bodies in

the  same  manner.  This  is  the  physical  significance  of  the  equality  of

gravitational and inertial mass. If gravitational and inertial mass were not

equal, we would not be able to look upon the paths of freely falling mass

points  as  (four-dimensional)  geodesics,  since  different  geometries  would

result for the various materials of the mass points. Furthermore, due to the

influence of gravitation upon light, light may be regarded, in this geometry,
                      2
as a realization of ds = 0, and the gravitational effect on infinitesimal clocks
                                                                            2
and rods is such that they may be considered as realizations of ds = ±1. This

universal effect of gravitation on all kinds of measuring instruments defines

therefore a single geometry. In this respect we may say that gravitation is

geometrized. We do not speak of a change produced by the gravitational field

in the measuring instruments, but regard the measuring instruments as “free

from deforming forces” in spite of the gravitational effects.  However, we have seen that for geometry, as for all other phenomena, we

must pose the question of causation. Even if we do not introduce a force to

explain the deviation of a measuring instrument from some normal geometry,

we must still invoke a force as a cause for the fact that there is a general

correspondence of all measuring instruments. We have expressed this idea in

§ 31 by means of the concept of adjustment. In this sense we must ascribe to

the gravitational field the physical reality of a force-field. We regard this

force-field as the cause of geometry itself, not as the cause of the disturbance

of geometrical relations. We can even demonstrate physically the existence of

this  force-field:  since  the  gravitational  field  is  measured  by  the  same

measuring  instruments  as  those  used  for  geometry,  these  measuring

instruments are at once indicators of the gravitational field. We are therefore

reversing the actual relationship if we speak of a reduction of mechanics to

geometry: it is not the theory of gravitation that becomes geometry, but it is

geometry that becomes an expression of the gravitational field. The theory of

relativity did not convert a part of physics into geometry. On the contrary,

even  more  physics  is  involved  in  geometry  than  was  suggested  by  the

empirical theory of physical geometry: the geometry of the universe is not

only a fact that can be ascertained empirically, but also a fact to be explained

by the effects of forces. In addition to the problem of the measurement of

physical  space,  known  since  Gauss,  Riemann  and  Helmholtz,  Einstein

introduced  the  problem  of  a scientific  explanation  of  physical  geometry,

which finds its mathematical solution in the gravitational field equations.

  According to Einstein’s theory, we may consider the effect of gravitational

fields on measuring instruments to be of the same type as all known effects of

forces. This conception stands in contrast to the view which interprets the

geometrization of physics as an exclusion of forces from the explanation of

planetary motion. This view is based on the laws of motion of a mass point.

In classical mechanics these laws state that a force-free point travels in a

straight line. Einstein substitutes “the straightest line” for “a straight line.”

Since, however, the characterization of the gravitational field is contained in

geometry,  these  laws  include  even  the  case  when  the  point  is  subject  to

gravitational forces. Planetary motion and the motion of a force-free point are

thus combined into a single law, which states that a mass point moves along

the  geodesic.  This  result  suggests  a  purely  geometrical  conception  of

gravitational motion. Accordingly, the planet does not follow its curved path

because it is acted upon by a force, but because the space-time manifoldleaves  it,  so  to  speak,  no  alternative  path.  Its  motion  resembles  that  of  a

sphere rolling on an irregular surface along some definite curves.

This view is correct, inasmuch as we have to consider, in accord with the

principle of action by contact, the planetary action to be caused by the state of

the  metrical  field  in  the  immediate  neighborhood  of  the  planet,  thus

relinquishing the Newtonian concept of action at a distance, which moves the

planet around the sun as though by a string. On the other hand, not only is the
                              100
metrical field determined  by distant masses through a genuine physical

process of causal propagation, but the effect of the metrical field itself on the

planet may be interpreted as a genuine physical force guiding it on its path. A

causal determination of the orbit by the nature of space is not compatible with

our customary physical concepts. If a sphere rolls on a material plane, it is

only a schematization to say that the geometry of the plane influences the

path of the sphere. We know that a more detailed investigation would reveal

the  presence  of  molecular  force-fields,  which  affect  the  molecules  on  the

surface of the sphere and thus force it into a definite path. Geometrical effects

reduce therefore, even in classical physics, to dynamic effects. Even in empty

Euclidean space, in which a mass point travels in a straight line according to

the law of inertia, we must not think of this path as an effect of the geometry

that  permits  the  mass  point  to  travel  on  the  shortest  path.  Even  here  the

guiding gravitational field, whose tensor g is reduced to the normal form,
                                                  µν

manifests itself and, due to its force, compels the mass point to travel along a

definite orbit.

The combination of gravitation and geometry therefore does not force us to

renounce dynamical conceptions, but teaches us that such conceptions are

applicable  even  to  those  cases  treated  previously  in  a  purely  geometric

fashion. It is no longer possible to assume a geometry of space independent

of physical realities. Geometric  measurement  is  a  handling  of  indicators;

therefore, the metric of the indicators is at once the measure of the field that

determines their adjustment.


§ 41. SPACE AND TIME IN SPECIAL GRAVITATIONAL

FIELDS

We  shall  now  give  a  more  detailed  description  of  the  geometry  of  the

gravitational field. For this purpose we refer to § 27, where we characterized

gravitation-free  space  by  certain  specializing  axioms  that  permitted  thechoice of selected coordinate systems. It turns out that the construction in §

27, which starts with the elementary concept of time order and leads to the

complete metric, is of fundamental importance: the levels of this construction

are levels of increasing generalization of the gravitational field if we proceed

in the opposite direction and gradually omit the specializing axioms. The

space-time properties of the gravitational field at each level are thus given by

those axioms which are still satisfied on that level.

The first step toward this generalization consists in the omission of axiom
101
V, which postulates the possibility of the choice of a coordinate system

with Euclidean  light-geometry.  The  space  characterized  by  the  remaining

four axioms (I—IV) corresponds to the space of the static gravitational field.

Again, as in the case of the gravitation-free space, we must add the condition

that it must be possible to connect the space points of the coordinate system

by rigid rods. The light-axioms alone will again be insufficient to give an

exhaustive  determination  of  the  state  of  motion.  In  the  language  of  the

Riemannian geometry, the static gravitational field is characterized by the

fact that the g no longer assume the normal form g (15, § 38), but are still
              µνµν

of a rather simple kind because they are given by functions of the space

coordinates alone, independent of time, with the additional condition that the

g (α = 1, 2, 3) vanish.
α4

In  such  a  gravitational  field,  space  and  time  still  have  very  simple

properties,  like  those  of  the  gravitation-free  case  except  that  the  space-

geometry  is  non-Euclidean.  Time,  on  the  other  hand,  retains  the  special

property that Einstein’s definition of simultaneity (2, § 19, with  ) leads

 
to a symmetrical and transitive synchronization, as we showed in § 27 prior

to the introduction of axiom V. We may therefore understand by the time of a

static gravitational field the same as we did by the time of an inertial system.

A difference exists only in that transported clocks deviate not only relative to

the simultaneity of the system but also relative to the unit of time transmitted

by the light signal. The unit of time can therefore no longer be transported,

yet the difference between the transported unit and the projected unit depends

only on position and not on the path of transport.

This statement is a consequence of the fact that the clock indicates the

interval, which reduces to—gaadxg® = ds?
                                          (1)



for a clock at rest. If g is different at the two points P and P′, then the
                            44

corresponding dx must also be different, since the unit clock supplies the
                  4

same ds. If we now call dx the unit of the coordinate time at P, and dx′ the
                              44

time  unit  at P′  which  was  transmitted  by  means  of  light  signals  from P

according to (1, § 27), we then have







 
                                          (2)



This  formulation  is  a  rigorous  derivation  of  the  retardation  of  clocks  in

gravitational fields (the red shift), which was mentioned briefly in § 36. It

states merely that the unit of the time coordinate canno t be transported. The

measure of a time interval at P is not given by dx, however, but by 
                                                            4

dx; and since this measure is everywhere realized by clocks, the measure of
4

a time interval is obviously transportable. This peculiarity is more clearly

characterized in a different fashion. One might try to define a time coordinate

such that equal measures of time would correspond everywhere to equal dx,
                                                                                          4

i.e., g would become equal to—1. Though we can at first combine this rule
    44

for the measure of time with an arbitrary definition of simultaneity which

satisfies the inequality for ε given in (3, § 19), simultaneity would gradually

shift in such a manner that later this inequality would be violated and events

would be simultaneous that are not indeterminate as to their time order. The

time  thus  introduced  would  therefore  violate  the  basic  topological

requirement of time measurement. We may therefore say that it is impossible

to  define  in  a  gravitational  field  a  time coordinate  that  corresponds

everywhere directly to the measure of time.Let us now proceed to measurements of space. Spatial congruence is given

by  the  characteristic  length  of  rigid  rods.  Since  the  events  that  are

simultaneous at both ends of the rod in the sense of the natural length are also

simultaneous in the sense of the coordinate time in a static gravitational field,
                                                            2
we have for the characteristic length dx = 0, and ds reduces to
                                            4






 

143

 
                                          (3)



This means that spatial congruence is defined directly by the rigid rod. Two

rods equal in length when compared at one place are also called equally long

when located at different places. As in the case of the time unit of the clock,

this  definition  of  congruence  applies  only  to  the measure  of  the  segment

determined by the rods, while the respective spatial coordinate differentials

dx  (α  =  1,  2,  3)  are  everywhere  different.  It  is  impossible,  therefore,  to
α

construct a spatial coordinate system that eliminates this difference between

the rod and the coordinate differentials throughout.

  Space measurements and time measurements behave therefore in a parallel

fashion. Measuring instruments still supply the measure of length, but they

can no longer be used to define a uniform coordinate system. In gravitation-

free fields the two concepts coincide; there, clocks and rods supply a measure

as well as a normal coordinate system. In the gravitational field we can no

longer  construct  a  normal  coordinate  system.  Instead,  the  measuring

instruments supply the g that correspond to the chosen coordinate system.
                            µν

  These relations have a peculiar consequence regarding the velocity of light.

Let us imagine the Michelson experiment (see Fig. 29) to be performed in a

gravitational field, with the arms of the apparatus extended so far that they go

beyond the region in which the special theory of relativity applies with a

sufficient degree of approximation. The two arms are to be equally long in

the sense of (3), i.e., when small measuring rods are placed along the arms,

they mark off an equal number of segments on both arms. It can be shown

that then the round-trip times of the light signals along the two arms becomeunequal, thus







                                          (4)



Therefore the matter-geometrical equality of distances no longer coincides

with the light-geometrical equality. (The two expressions in (4) would be

equal only if the arms of the Michelson apparatus became infinitesimal.) In

gravitational fields, the velocity of light is no longer constant, and light no

longer travels along the shortest path in space. In a static gravitational field

however,  the  velocity  of  light  is  still  independent  of  both  time  and  the

direction in which a given distance is traveled. We cannot say, of course, that

the light-geometrical definition of the equality of length (10, § 27), which

would make the velocity of light constant even in this case, is incorrect. Since

the light-axioms I—IV, 2 are still satisfied, the light-geometrical definition

can  be  carried  through  consistently  in  the  static  gravitational  field,  but  it
                                                      2
would  contradict  the  matter-axioms.  The ds  defined  by  the  transport  of

clocks and rods would no longer agree with that defined by light. The choice

of  the  definition  is  arbitrary.  Einstein  prefers  the  matter-geometrical

definition for reasons of descriptive simplicity.

  These geometrical relations supply a good example of a case where the

“natural” definitions of the spatial metric do not always lead to the same

metric. The light-geometrical definition of length presents a standard just as

simple and natural as that given by the matter-geometrical one. Whereas the

two  coincide  in  the  gravitation-free  field,  they  no  longer  do  so  in  a

gravitational  field.  We  shall  find  a  similar  discrepancy  upon  further

generalization.

Let  us  now  take  the  second  step  in  our  generalization  by  omitting  the

round-trip axiom IV, 2, according to which there exist coordinate systems in

which the time needed to travel around a triangle is equal in both directions.

The space characterized by the remaining light-axioms corresponds to the

stationary  gravitational  field.  Again  we  must  add  the  condition  that  it  be

possible to connect all space points of the coordinate system by rigid rods, inorder  to  obtain  a  sufficient  specification  of  the  coordinate  system.  In  the

language of Riemannian geometry, the stationary gravitational field is given

by the condition that the g are still independent of time, but that in contrast
                              µν

to the static field, the g (α = 1, 2, 3) do not vanish.
                          α4

The latter property has the consequence that time determination becomes

more  complicated.  The  velocity  of  light  is  now  different  along  the  two

directions of a given segment. We can recognize this fact from the failure of

the round-trip axiom, since it is only this axiom that renders transitive the

synchronization constructed according to Einstein’s definition. If the axiom is

no longer satisfied, then the definition of synchronization will not be satisfied

for two clocks each set relative to a central clock (using  ). This result

 
means that there is no definition of time according to which it is possible for

the velocity of light everywhere to be equal in both directions along the same

segment.

An example of a stationary system is given by a circular disk that rotates

relative to an inertial system K. For this disk, we can obtain a rather simple

definition of time if we set up a clock at its center and synchronize from there

all clocks on the disk, with (1, § 27). Two clocks on the perimeter of the

 
disk will then have relative to each other a different ε which, however, is

constant in time and depends on the respective positions of the clocks. This

definition of time is therefore quite plausible. It is, incidentally, identical with

the Einsteinian definition of time in K, i.e., every clock on the disk always

shows  exactly  the  same  time  as  that  particular  clock  of K  over  which  it

happens to be located at that moment.

It is important to note that in stationary systems even space measurements

assume some very complicated properties. The characteristic length ds of the

unit rod, which represents an interval, is no longer identical with the spatial

length do of the rod according to (3), because the length dσ is measured by

two events that take place at the two ends of the rod and are simultaneous in

the  sense  of  the  simultaneity  of  stationary  systems.  However,  since  this

simultaneity  does  not  agree  with  Einstein’s   ,  the  events  are  not

 
simultaneous in the sense of the the characteristic length. This fact leads to

the consequence that the spatial congruence of stationary systems is no longer
                                                  102
defined by rigid rods. A correction factor  dependent on both position and

direction must be included. In contrast to the static field this result means notonly a difference in the spatial coordinate differentials determined by the rod

but also a difference in the measure of length determined by the rod. Two

rods equally long when compared at one place are no longer equally long

when they are apart (although they would always be found to be equally long

when compared at one place after having been transported along different

paths). The spatial geometry of stationary gravitational fields is therefore no

longer based on the definition of congruence in terms of rigid bodies.

The variation of the unit in transport can be interpreted as the effect of a

force which would then have the property of a universal supplementary force.

This  definition  of  congruence  seems  to  be  in  conflict  with  our  previous

considerations  of  §  5  and  §  6,  according  to  which  universal  forces  were

excluded by definition. The present situation, however, is more complicated:
                                            2
whereas Einstein’s definition of the ds in terms of clocks and rods excludes

universal forces from the four-dimensional manifold, such forces now are

unavoidable in three-dimensional space.

If conversely we were to define spatial congruence on the rotating disk by

rigid  rods  under  exclusion  of  universal  forces—which  is  of  course  also

permissible—we  would  then  introduce  universal  forces  into  the  four-
                                                                                  2
dimensional space-time manifold, and Einstein’s realization of the ds would

thus have to be renounced. There appears therefore a discrepancy between

two natural definitions of the metric within matter-geometry itself. Due to

this fact, the transforming away of universal forces is no longer completely in

our hands. This result shows that there are limitations to the arbitrariness of

definitions.


§ 42. SPACE AND TIME IN GENERAL GRAVITATIONAL

FIELDS

  Finally,  we  shall  study  the  most  general  gravitational  fields,  omitting

axiom IV, 1, which postulates the existence of stationary systems in which

the time  of the path of a light ray is constant for any pair of points. In

the language of the Riemannian geometry, these are systems with arbitrary
  103
g  that change with position and time.
µν

How are we to conceive the spatio-temporal metric of such a manifold?

Here we are faced by a world of the παντα ρε, where actually everything is

in  a  state  of  continuous  flux.  If  we  were  to  measure  the  diameter  andcircumference of a circle, their quotient today would not be the same as that

of tomorrow. Indeed, if we were to make a material circle of some wire, it

would  no  longer  be  a  circle  tomorrow,  having  been  bent  by  fluctuating

gravitational fields. Static structures are therefore impossible in this world,

which bends and shifts everything with time. The concept of rigidity loses its

meaning in this world, in which only rubber bands would be “solid” bodies

that do not break. We recognized earlier (§ 34) the relativity of the concept of

relative  rest,  and  we  showed  that  the  rigidity  of  solid  bodies  is  merely  a

convenient definition of relative rest. Certain coordinate systems have the

property that all their points can be connected by rigid rods and that the

points thus connected retain their identity through the course of time. These

special  properties  disappear  in  the  most  general  gravitational  fields.  We

could, of course, still define a framework of iron beams as internally at rest,

defining away in this fashion its internal motion. This would be possible so

long as the fluctuations of the metrical field were not strong enough to exceed

the elastic limit of the material and tear the framework. However, we would

also find that a corresponding framework made of copper beams, which had

originally been equal in size and shape to the first, would assume a different

size and shape after some time. Its points must therefore have moved relative

to the first framework. Hence solid bodies would therefore no longer define a

unique  coordinate  system  as  internally  at  rest,  due  to  differences  in  their

elastic properties. We thus lose the possibility of defining a geometrical state

as rigid in terms of solid bodies, since this definition was based primarily on

the uniform behavior of different materials. There is therefore no longer a

geometry of rigid bodies.

  Similar complications arise for light-geometry. Light rays can no longer be

defined as straight lines, because their paths back and forth do not coincide.

A straight line from A to B would be different from the straight line from B to

A. Even the points through which the light ray travels in one direction from A

to B will vary with time. Light also lcses its uniqueness with respect to time,

since there is no longer a specific definition of simultaneity on the basis of

which the velocity of light is constant. In whatever manner we set our clocks,

not only will the velocity of light generally be different at different points but

it will also have different values for different line elements through the same

point—and even these values are subject to change in the course of time.

There  is  therefore  no  light-geometry  in  these  most  general  gravitational

fields.It seems reasonable to ask whether there is anything left which might be

called geometry. If there are no rigid bodies, then our previous definition of

physical geometry, as the system of the relations of rigid bodies, loses its

applicability; and if there is no light-geometry either, then light cannot take

the place of the rigid body in the coordinative definition of geometry. The

coupling  of  geometry  and  gravitation  that  follows  from  the  theory  of

relativity has therefore a peculiar consequence. Its greatest success consisted

in its explanation of geometry, in which it revealed the behavior of measuring

instruments as an effect of a gravitational field. But this conception subjects

geometry to the variability of gravitational phenomena, and geometry loses

its definiteness in fields in which the adjustment of measuring instruments is

not  uniform.  Is  it  reasonable,  then,  to  speak  of  a  geometry  in  such

gravitational fields?

Let us first see how a physicist solves the problem. He makes use of the

applicability of the special theory of relativity to infinitesimal domains. In

small regions—which incidentally are quite large with respect to the human

organism,  since  deviations  from  the  geometry  of  the  special  theory  of

relativity  appear  only  in  astronomical  dimensions  —he  can  determine  the

metrical relations with sufficient accuracy according to the methods of the

special theory of relativity. He can use the light-geometry, and he will find a

sufficient number of rigid bodies. He can avail himself of these bodies if he

assumes that the axioms are satisfied for limited regions of space only, and,

since the g are regarded as variable in time, if he limits himself to small
            µν

time intervals. He would therefore consider only large-scale phenomena as

fluctuating. He might now determine even a large-scale metric by treating the

fluctuating  phenomena  in  such  a  fashion  that  the  metric  corresponds

everywhere,  in  infinitesimal  domains,  to  that  of  the  special  theory  of

relativity. He would therefore describe the path of light rays and the motion

of the planets in terms of correction factors such that in turn these physical

processes would define a metric corresponding everywhere in infinitesimal

domains to the special theory of relativity. This method yields a physical

geometry for large dimensions, which, of course, does not contain “direct”

realizations of the geometrical elements; it would be defined by “indirect

connection” to physical reality. We can thus impose upon this flowing world

a  conceptual  system  that  makes  the  chaos  appear  as  an ordered  flow.

Geometry would then be that conceptual framework which brings order into

the chaos.This  definition  of  physical  geometry  is,  of  course,  very  abstract.  It  is

constructed by reference to infinitesimal domains, and we must admit that the

concepts of space and time seem to be meaningful only for these domains. Its

space-time determinations would therefore not express the relations of the

behavior of large physical objects, but merely describe the behavior of these

physical  objects  relative  to  infinitesimal  measuring  instruments.  This

conception leads to a considerable limitation of the original meaning of the

concept of geometry.

We must therefore ask whether it is perhaps possible to establish between

large-scale  structures  in  such  a  world  relations  that  might  be  regarded  as

geometrical.  This  possibility  is  suggested  by  the  idea  that  the  relation  to

infinitesimal measuring instruments will entail certain relations between the

large-scale structures themselves. We therefore must try to discover these

large-scale  relations.  The  task  can  indeed  be  carried  out.  Mathematically

speaking, this problem is the same as asking for the integral properties of a

Riemannian geometry which is known to correspond to Euclidean geometry

in the differential domain.

The answer to this question is found in the concepts of topology which we

have used earlier (§ 12 and § 21). Although the metric of Riemannian spaces

is completely arbitrary, their topology is quite definite, inasmuch as the basic

topological properties are common to all Riemannian spaces. There may be

some variations, of course, in the topological form, which may be that of a

sphere, a torus, an open space, etc. However, these are merely special cases

independent  of  which  there  is  a  common  topological  basis  given  by  the

condition  that  every  Riemannian  space  must  be  “plane  in  its  smallest

elements,”  i.e.,  correspond  to  the  special  theory  of  relativity.  It  is  this

topological property that is common to all curved surfaces; all of them are

constructed  from  “infinitesimal  planes”  and  are  therefore  topologically

related. We can formulate these common topological properties, as will be

seen presently, by characterizing them as properties of “ cut-out regions.”

Let us consider a torus. A torus cannot be mapped on a plane topologically

(in a one-to-one correspondence and a continuous fashion) because it has a

different topological shape. We can, however, cut out of the surface of the

torus a region that will become topologically equivalent to a bounded region

of the plane, under a suitable choice of a boundary. The curvature does not

matter  in  this  case.  The  impossibility  of  a  one-to-one  and  continuousmapping applies only to the torus as a whole, not to a cut-out region. Since all

curved surfaces behave in this fashion, we can topologically map the cut-out

regions of any surface directly upon any other. Thus we have a method to

eliminate  differences  in  topological  shape:  we  shall  call  two  manifolds

topologically related if we can everywhere cut out regions from them which

are topologically equivalent.

It is important to note that this statement does not employ the concept of

infinitesimal domain, since we are not saying that the statement applies to

finite regions only in the sense of an approximation and is strictly valid only

in  the  limit.  The  statement  applies  rigorously  to  finite  regions.  This

characterization  of  common  topological  properties  differs  from  the

formulation referring to “planeness in the smallest elements,” or to “Euclidity

of  the  smallest  elements,”  although  it  is  mathematically  equivalent  to  the

latter. The latter characterization contains metrical concepts and can therefore

be applied only in the limit. The characterization in terms of cut-out regions,

however, uses exclusively a topological concept, namely that of one-to-one

and continuous mapping, which can be strictly satisfied for non-vanishing

regions. If we speak of “cut-out regions,” we shall always mean nonvanishing

finite regions. One should also note that we merely say that such regions can

be  cut  out,  since  of  course  not  every  cut-out  region  has  the  described

properties. For the sake of convenience we shall adopt the rule that to say “a

space  has  such  and  such  properties  in  cut-out  regions”  means  that  such

regions can be cut out.

Our problem is now reduced to finding the topological properties of the

cut-out regions in the space-time manifold of the most general gravitational

field.  The  answer  to  this  question  is  very  simple:  they  are  the  same

topological properties as those displayed by the space-time manifold of the

infinitesimal  domains.  Any  curved  surface  is  in  its  cut-out  regions

topologically equivalent to the plane. Similarly the space-time order in the

cut-out regions of the most general gravitational field must be topologically

equivalent to the space-time order of the special theory of relativity. This is

the key that opens the door to the characterization of the geometry of the

gravitational field.

We have already discussed the topological properties of the space-time

order in our analysis of the special theory of relativity. We found there that

the concept of time order is of primary importance and that it can be reducedto the concept of the causal chain. The causal chain proved to be the basic

topological  element  of time  order.  The  concepts earlier,  later,  and

simultaneous revealed themselves as ordering concepts by means of which

we were able to characterize the most general properties of causal structure.

Continued investigation showed furthermore that even spatial order can be

based  on  the  causal  chain.  We  found  there  that  the  definition  of  spatial

distance (§ 27) amounts to saying that a space point is farther away when the

causal propagation takes more time to reach it. When we used these concepts

in the light-geometry for the definition of the spatial metric, we first laid

down their topological basis in the form of a special coordinative definition.

It was the concept of spatial betweenness which was thus supplied by the

causal propagation. There can be no doubt that this conception reveals the

basic meaning of the topology of space. It contains the answer to the question

what is actually meant by the order of spatially adjacent regions. That we call

Sirius very distant and the sun relatively close means nothing other than that

a causal chain originating with us will reach Sirius much later than the sun.

The  “light-year”  of  the  astronomer,  which  was  originally  introduced  as  a

matter  of  expedience,  corresponds  to  the  logical  archetype  of  all

measurements of length. Time, and through it causality, supplies the measure

and the order of space; not time order alone, but the combined space-time

order reveals itself as the ordering schema governing causal chains and thus

as the expression of the causal structure of the universe.

The  system  of  causal  ordering  relations,  independent  of  any  metric,

presents therefore the most general type of physical geometry, namely the

type realized by large objects even in the most general gravitational fields. If

rigidity and uniformity were to disappear, the causal chain would still remain

as a type of order. The causal chain is the real process that constitutes the

immediate physical correlate of the purely ordering geometry of Riemannian

spaces.  Although  everything  is  in  continuous  flux,  there  is  a  structure

discernible in this flux. It is striated and can be resolved into chains that

define a strict topological order. The analysis of the concepts of space and

time, which was carried through by the theory of relativity and which has

culminated in the denial of any metrical importance of geometry, has clarified

the cognitive significance of the concepts of space and time. The order of

causal chains is ultimately reflected in all space-time determinations.

The causal  theory  of  space  and  time,  to  which  we  were  led  by  theepistemological study of the foundations of space-time theory, constitutes the

foundation also of the relativistic theory of gravitation. Only this theory can

reveal the physical structure into which space-time order relations can be

embedded  even  when  all  of  the  metrical  properties  of  the  space-time

continuum are destroyed by gravitational fields. While we thus see in the

causal  theory  of  space  and  time  the  philosophical  result  of  the  theory  of

relativity, we wish to point out that this idea of a causal space-time order was

conceived long before the advent of the theory of relativity. It was none other

than  Leibniz  who  developed  in  his  “  Initia  rerum  mathematicorum  meta-
                                                  104
physica” the basic ideas of this conception. The new development is not a

direct  continuation  of  the  work  of  Leibniz,  who  naturally  did  not  know
                                                                                    105
anything about the relativity of simultaneity. The author’s development  of

the causal theory of space and time was undertaken without knowledge of the

corresponding work of Leibniz. It is the more remarkable that Leibniz, this

genuine  philosopher,  was  able  to  understand  the  nature  of  scientific

knowledge  to  such  an  extent  that,  two  hundred  years  later,  a  new

development  of  physics  and  an  analysis  of  its  philosophic  foundations

confirmed his views.


C. The Most General Properties of Space and Time


§ 43. THE SINGULAR NATURE OF TIME

We  shall  now  proceed  to  develop  more  precisely  certain  conclusions

derivable from the causal theory of space and time that express very general

properties of spatio-temporal order. A mathematical formulation will again

provide  us  with  a  convenient  approach  to  this  problem.  The  fundamental

topological properties of the special theory of relativity are expressed in the

fundamental form of the metric, namely in its indefinite character and in its

four-dimensionality.  We  shall  discuss  both  of  these  factors  in  our

presentation, devoting the present section to the indefinite character of the

metric.

The indefinite character of the fundamental metrical form expresses the

singular  nature  of  time.  We  have  pointed  out,  however,  in  §  29  that  this

characterization does not give us an exhaustive description of the nature of

time. It expresses a distinction between space and time, but does not give us a

complete comprehension of the peculiar characteristics of time. An additionalessential property of time is its directionality. This specific feature is based

on the fact that time—and time alone—is the dimension of the causal chains

upon  which  we  have  based  our  theory  of  space  and  time.  Time  is  the

direction of the grain of the manifold along which the causal chains extend,

whereas  space  reflects  only  the  neighborhood  relations  between  the

coexisting  causal  chains.  The  direction  of  the  causal  chains  is  also  the

direction of the world-lines of objects which remain identical with themselves

and  which  therefore  represent  special  cases  of  causal  chains.  These  lines

exhibit most clearly the singular character of time. The atoms of a material

rod  located  next  to  each  other  on  a  spacelike  world-line  are  said  to  be

different from one another; they are, of course, linked by dynamic bonds, but

these forces merely combine them into a complex without destroying their

individuality. The points of a timelike world-line, in contrast, are referred to

as states of the same object. The atom of yesterday and the atom of today are

identical, whereas the atom at the left end of the rod is different from the

atom  at  the  right  end.  We  may  denote  this  kind  of  identity  by  the  term
                                          106
genidentity, introduced by K. Lewin. Let us take, for example, a structure

as complicated as the human organism. Mr. A of yesterday and Mr. A of

today are identical, but not Mr. A and Mr. B. If this decisive difference did

not  exist  between  space  and  time,  we  could  consider  the  continuation  of

yesterday’s Mr. A to be today’s (or even yesterday’s) Mr. B, and we could

construct the world-line of a human being running through several different

individuals.

The theory of genidentity has received quite a blow from the criticism of

the concept of substance, which was brought about by a reconsideration of

the ether theory. Accordingly it is no longer necessary to consider the world-

lines of a material field as striated in a definite direction; the choice of the

grain  includes  a  certain  amount  of  arbitrariness.  If  the  state  of  a  field  is

graphically  represented  in  the  customary  fashion,  as  in Fig.  46,  then  the

vertical lines as well as the dotted slanted lines may be considered as the

world-lines  of  the  individual  “field  particles.”  Particle A  may  thus  be
                                                                        1

considered as genidentical with A, A . . . as well as with B, C, D. . . .
                                        23234

Nature does not supply a unique rule in this case. Einstein saw in this fact the
                                              107
collapse of the old concept of substance. This means only (and that is how

it  is  formulated  by  Einstein)  that there are  material  fields  in  which  this

arbitrariness exists. Einstein thus wishes to characterize the metrical field thatpropagates gravitational forces. On the other hand, there are also material

fields in which there is a natural striation; an example is atomic matter, the

world-line bundles of which can by no means be considered as arbitrary in

the sense of Fig. 46. We shall not pursue the significance of the concept of

genidentity at this point, since this question would lead us away from our

immediate problems of space and time into the problems of existence, which

need not be referred to in this investigation because time preserves those

properties with which we are concerned even in continuous fields, according

to Fig. 46. The world-lines of Fig. 46 can be chosen arbitrarily only within

the timelike cone, i.e., they cannot exceed a certain slope. Even continuous

fields single out the dimension of time as uniquely suited to the concept of

genidentity, a concept that can never be satisfied by spacelike world-lines.



















 
Fig. 46. Arbitrariness of the striation of world-lines in a continuous field.



The concept of genidentity is, consequently, closely related to the concept

of causality. Different states can be genidentical only if they are causally

related.  This  conception  agrees  with  our  definition  of  causal  connection,

which considers the causal chain a signal, i.e., the transmission of a mark. To

speak of a recognition of the same mark implies a striation of the space-time

manifold. Not all world-lines can be interpreted as lines of the progress of a

mark. At the same time, however, our characterization of causality by means

of the mark principle is sufficiently broad to include the arbitrariness in thechoice of the lines of genidentity diagramed in Fig. 46.

If  we  now  ask  how  the  topological  properties  of  time  are  to  be

characterized in more detail, we may point to § 21 and § 22 which contain the

answer to this question. The laws formulated there as axioms of time order

and time comparison contain those properties of time order that survive even

in the most general gravitational fields. The fundamental concepts earlier,

later,  indeterminate  as  to  time  order  are  therefore  left  unaffected  by  the

relativistic analysis of the concepts of space and time. These fundamental

concepts constitute the core of the physical order of time. We notice that the

intuitive basis  of  time  order  has  been  retained.  The  relativistic  theory  of

gravitation does not destroy the intuitive character of time.

As explained, the validity of the topological axioms of time order can be

asserted in gravitational fields only for cut-out regions. The structure of the

world as a whole cannot be determined so long as the validity of special

relativity in the infinitesimal is the only mathematical basis assumed. The

holistic  properties  are  not  determined,  if  the  description  is  restricted  to

infinitesimal regions; the topological character of the universe remains an

open question. In particular the possibility remains that for the universe as a

whole the axiom of the nonexistence of closed causal chains (p. 139) may

fail. Mathematically speaking, it is possible to conceive a world in which the

special  theory  of  relativity  applies  in  infinitesimal  domains  without

exception, yet in which causal chains may be closed in the world as a whole.











 
Fig. 47. A two-dimensional world, without singularities, containing closed

                                        time-lines.



To understand this result let us consider a graphical representation of a

two-dimensional world, with one space and one time coordinate, drawn on

the surface of a cylinder (Fig. 47). The time coordinate corresponds to a lineencircling  the  cylinder,  while  the  space  coordinate  corresponds  to  a  line

going to infinity in both directions, parallel to the axis of the cylinder. Such a

manifold  has  no  curvature  and  satisfies  the  special  theory  of  relativity  in

every respect in finite cut-out regions. Only as a whole it has the peculiarity

that time lines may be closed. A light signal L will travel like a spiral to

infinity, yet it may be reflected (at S) so as to return to its starting point.

 

This simple model demonstrates strictly that closed timelike world-lines

can exist in a world in which the special theory of relativity holds without

singularities.  Our  proof  is  based  on  the  idea  that  the  Minkowskian

geometrical representation of the indefinite metric accomplishes a one-to-one

coordination between the definite and the indefinite metric and that a surface

possible in a definite space will correspondingly lead to a coordinated surface

in the indefinite space. This proof answers one of the questions posed in A., §

48. The proof of the satisfaction of axiom I, 1 in real systems (A., p. 148) is

thus shown to be invalid by this model. The proof overlooks the fact that the

existence of closed world-lines demands only an “apparent singularity” (A.,

p. 142) of the coordinate system, such as the singularity of the coordinate

system of Fig. 47 at the origin of the time axis.

 

We described earlier (p. 141) the peculiar experiences that would result

from the existence of closed causal chains. The general theory of relativity

envisages such experiences as possible provided that no law regarding the

order  of  space  and  time  is  recognized  other  than  the  special  theory  of

relativity in infinitesimal domains. It may be advisable to consider this law

insufficient and to exclude topological structures like that of Fig. 47 by a

special axiom. At present, the evidence indicates that the time order is not

closed.

  These results exhaust the contribution of the theory of relativity to the

problem of time. The theory of relativity has demonstrated the connection

between the concepts of time and of causality and has led to the formulation

of the general axioms of the order of time. A further penetration into the

nature of time will be possible only if we subject the concept of causality to a

more  detailed  analysis.  This  topic  will  have  to  be  discussed  in  another
            108
publication.§ 44. THE NUMBER OF DIMENSIONS OF SPACE

Let us now turn to the second of the above-mentioned basic properties of

the fundamental metrical form. Its indefinite character is expressed by the

uniqueness of time. Now we shall investigate the significance of the number

of its dimensions. Since one dimension is distinguished from the others by

virtue of the uniqueness of time, we can restrict our investigation to the three

dimensions of space.

  Various views have been expressed with regard to this question. It ’ has

been  answered  mostly  in  a  subjective  sense.  The  three-dimensionality  of

space has often been looked upon as a function of the human perceptual

apparatus, which can visualize spatial relations only in this fashion. Poincaré

tried to find a physiological foundation for this number; according to him two

of the dimensions are due to the retinal image, the third to the “effort of

accommodation which must be made, and to a sense of the convergence of
                  109
the two eyes.”   Even  if  this  physiological  explanation  were  tenable,  it

completely overlooks the fact that the number 3 of dimensions represents

primarily a fact concerning the objective world and that the function of the

visual  apparatus  is  due  to  a  developmental  adaptation  to  the  physical

environment.  This  conception  is  supported  by  our  account  of physical

geometry. In the present section we shall deal with the objective significance

of the three-dimensionality of space.

We have previously shown (§ 12) that the topological properties of space

are more directly determined by objective facts than its metrical properties.

We showed that the redefinition of a geometry into a different topological

type leads to causal anomalies. The same consequence applies to the number

of  dimensions,  which  is  also  a  topological  property.  Two  manifolds  of

different  dimensionality  can  never  be  mapped  upon  one  another  in  a

continuous one-to-one transformation. The introduction of a different number

of dimensions into physical space by means of a transformation—which is

just as possible as the introduction of a different geometry—would destroy all

existing causal laws. It is the characteristic of three-dimensionality that it and

only it leads to continuous causal laws for physical reality. This empirical

result describes a property of reality and constitutes the objective meaning of

the statement that space has three dimensions.

We saw earlier that measurements of space are reducible to measurementsof time and that in the most general gravitational fields, where no geometry

of rigid bodies exists, the order of space can be defined only as the structure

of  causal  chains.  Now  we  can  come  to  a  deeper  understanding  of  the

connection between the dimensionality of space and the concept of causality.

In § 27 we formulated definition 10 according to which a spatial distance is

measured by the time a light ray requires to traverse it. If we now ignore the

measure supplied by this definition, it will reduce to the more precise form of

definition e (p. 169) of the concept between, whose properties are determined

especially by axiom G. It has the same meaning as the principle of action by

contact: causal effects cannot reach distant points of space without having

previously  passed  through  the  intermediate  points.  Through  the  above

definition of between the principle of action by contact becomes the more

fundamental principle of spatial order: the neighborhood relations of space

are to be chosen in such a way that the principle of action by contact is

satisfied.  This  principle  expresses  the  prescription  which  our  concept  of

causality yields for the topology of space.

This rule determines the dimensionality of space as will be shown by the

following consideration. First, it must be taken as an empirical fact that there

is at least one dimensionality satisfying the principle of action by contact. If,

however,  there  is  such  a  dimensionality,  there  can  be  only one.

Transformations  to  other  dimensionalities  always  violate  the  principle  of

action  by  contact,  because  there  are  no  continuous  one-to-one

transformations between spaces of different dimensionalities. This result is

the basis for the determination of the number of dimensions. Let us now

pursue this idea in more detail by means of a very simple example.

  There are instances in physics where we work with spaces of a higher

dimensionality, namely, whenever we use a so-called parameter space. Let

us think, for example, of the state of a cloud of molecules as it occurs in a

gas.  The  state  of  the  gas  is  determined  at  any  time t  when  the  three

coordinates of each of the n molecules are known, i.e., by the specification of

n points in the three-dimensional coordinate space. Instead, we may consider

all  of  the  coordinates  as  dimensions  of  a  3n-dimensional  space,  which  is

called the parameter space. The state of the gas is then given by one point in

this 3n-dimensional space. These descriptions are evidently equivalent: either

of  them  can  always  be  translated  into  the  other.  In  spite  of  this  fact  we

consider the parameter space merely a mathematical tool with no objectivereference, whereas we regard the three-dimensional space as the real space.

What is the justification for this distinction, which is ordinarily accepted as

self-evident  without  further  explanation?  Is  it  not  true  that  equivalent

descriptions correspond equally to reality?

The answer is that these descriptions are not equivalent descriptions. The

principle of action by contact decides in favor of the description in terms of

the coordinate space. We shall explain this idea by the use of an example in

which the parameter space has such a low number of dimensions that it can

be  diagramed  in  the  customary  fashion  (Fig.  48).  Let  us  consider  two

independent mass points moving on a straight line. In this case the coordinate

space is one-dimensional and the parameter space is two-dimensional. The

state of the point system at a given time is determined by the two coordinates

x and x of the mass points.
12






















 
        Fig. 48. Propagation of a disturbance in the parameter space.



Hence, the location of the points is given either by the two points p and p in
                                                                              12

the 1-dimensional coordinate space or by a single point P in the parameter

space. Formally speaking, we may conceive the motion of the point systemeither as the motion of two points in a 1-dimensional space or as the motion

of  a  single  point  in  a  2-dimensional  space.  But  if  we  now  introduce  the

principle of action by contact, the descriptions cease to be equivalent.

Let us consider a disturbance in the 1-dimensional space, such as a sound

wave  originating  from  point p.  According  to  the  principle  of  action  by
                                    1

contact, it will gradually travel from p in both directions. What would be its
                                            1

configuration in the 2-dimensional parameter space? Every point P of the

plane corresponds to a combination of two points pp on the x axis. All
                                                                ik1

combinations pp lie on the straight line pP. Since the disturbance acts at
                1k1

p, it must therefore affect all points on the line pP simultaneously and the
11

propagation of the disturbance will be represented by a lateral shift of the line

pP in the direction of the arrow. At the same time, however, there must also
1

occur a horizontal, symmetrically located, disturbance front  , since p
                                                                                          2

will also be disturbed as soon as it approaches the area of the disturbance.

Whereas the disturbance spreads from a center in the coordinate space, it

does not have a central point in the parameter space, but affects immediately

two intersecting straight lines. This fact shows that the “real space” in this

example is 1-dimensional; only in the 1-dimensional space can the principle

of action by contact be maintained, while in the 2-dimensional space infinite

velocities of propagation exist along the intersecting straight lines.

 

  Besides this interpretation, there exists another in which we do not speak

of  infinite  speeds  of  propagation  along  the  straight  line,  but  of  a

preestablished harmony. Whenever a disturbance originates in a point on one

of the straight lines, it originates at the same time also in all of its other

points, because there is a corresponding cause for the disturbance at every

point.  These  two  interpretations  are  equivalent  and  constitute  the  same

violation of the principle of causality. The satisfaction of the principle of

action by contact excludes, therefore, preestablished harmony. See also p. 65.

 

We must now formulate this analysis in more detail. The transition from

the coordinate space to the parameter space involves a certain arbitrariness,

and we must now specify the presupposition according to which the point

disturbance in the coordinate space is transformed into a line disturbance in

the parameter space. If p lies within the region of the disturbance, its path
                            1will be deflected. Consequently, the path of the combination point P will also

be deflected. and it is irrelevant in this case whether p is affected by the
                                                                  2

disturbance. If we now require that a deflection of P can occur only if P lies

within  the  domain  of  disturbance  in  the  parameter  space,  it  follows

necessarily that the disturbance in the parameter space must occur along a

line and cannot be restricted to the immediate neighborhood of a point.

This disturbance has a second peculiarity. At first it has no effect on the

state of motion of p since it affects only p. In the 2-dimensional parameter
                      21

space,  it  can  therefore  affect  the  point P  of  the  system  only  in  a  certain

limited fashion, namely, the disturbance can change only the x coordinate
                                                                            1

and not the x coordinate of P. If PP’ is a segment of the undisturbed path of
              2

P, and PP"  is  the  corresponding  segment  of  the  disturbed  path,  then  the

points P′  and P″  lying  on  the  same  horizontal  line  must  correspond  to

simultaneous events. The path of P receives from the linear disturbance only

a sideward bulge perpendicular to the front of the disturbance. The central

disturbance spreading in all directions in the coordinate space will be linear

and will spread unidirectionally in the parameter space.

If, on the other hand, the process of the disturbance were centrally oriented

in the 2-dimensional space, it would not be oriented in the same way in the 1-

dimensional space. If we consider a disturbance spreading centrally from P, it

will be represented in the 1-dimensional space by two disturbances which

affect p  and p  simultaneously  and  spread  centrally  from  each  of  these
        12

points.  Between  these  two  disturbances  there  would  exist  an  action  at  a

distance: if the point p should enter one of the regions of disturbance, it
                          1

would be disturbed only if simultaneously the distant point p were located in
                                                                      2
                                        110
the  other  region  of  disturbance.  A  central  action  by  contact  in  the

parameter  space  would  therefore  lead  to  an  action  at  a  distance  in  the

coordinate space. In this case we would say that the 2-dimensional space is

the “real one,” while the 1-dimensional space is merely a mathematical tool.

As  was  pointed  out  before,  the  described  difference  in  the  causal

propagation of the two spaces is based on the fact that no continuous one-to-

one transformation is possible between spaces of different dimensionalities.

There can only be a transformation that changes the elements of the space,

i.e.,  a  point  in  the  2-dimensional  space  corresponds  to  a  combination  of

points in the 1-dimensional space, and a point in the 1-dimensional spacecorresponds to a straight line (or a pair of intersecting straight lines) in the 2-

dimensional space.

An extension of these considerations to higher numbers of dimensions is

easily  accomplished.  If  the  coordinate  space  is  3-dimensional,  and  the

parameter space n-dimensional (n > 3), then a disturbance in the coordinate

space which obeys the principle of action by contact is represented in the

parameter  space  by  intersecting  hyperplanes  moving  sideward,  which  can

again be disturbed only in a limited fashion and which will cover, in the

course of time, a cylindrical region having a 3-dimensional cross-section. A

centro-symmetric disturbance in the coordinate space corresponds therefore

to  a  group  of  cylindrical  and  unidirectional  disturbances  in  the  parameter

space. Conversely, a centro-symmetric disturbance in the parameter space

would  be  equivalent  in  the  coordinate  space  to  a  number  of  separate

disturbances connected at a distance.

Let  us  now  imagine  schematically  that  an  observer  wants  to  determine

experimentally  the  dimensionality  of  space.  He  will  try  to  combine  the

parameters  of  the  observed  events  into  one  space  and  test  whether  the

principle of action by contact is satisfied in this manifold. If it is not, he will

try a different combination of parameters, i.e., a different dimensionality of

the parameter space, testing thus various parameter spaces until he finds one

that has the desired property. This space he will call the coordinate space. If

we consider the coordinate space as a special case of a parameter space, we

may formulate the results of our considerations as follows:

  The principle of action by contact can be satisfied only for a single choice

of  the  dimensionality  of  the  parameter  space;  that  particular  parameter

space in which it is satisfied is called the coordinate space or “real space.”

This  formulation  expresses  the  requirements  on  which  the  coordinative

definition  of  the  topological  space  is  based.  The  topology  is  therefore

basically  subject  to  the  same  qualifications  as  the  metric:  without  a

coordinative definition it is not determined, and therefore we cannot regard it

as an absolute datum. The metric of a space becomes an empirical fact only

after  the  postulate  of  the  disappearance  of  universal  forces  is  introduced.

Similarly, the topology of space becomes an empirical fact only if we add the

postulate of the principle of action by contact. This idea was first considered

in  §  12,  where  we  dealt  with  the  topological  character  of  space  and

recognized  that  it  is  determined  only  if  we  add  the  postulate  of  thedisappearance  of  causal  anomalies.  This  result  fits  into  our  present  more

general requirement, according to which not only the topological character

but also the neighborhood relations are determined only if the postulate of

action by contact is assumed. A recognition of the arbitrary components in

the various descriptions clarifies the objective nature of topology. That the

requirement of the principle of action by contact can be satisfied at all, and in

particular, that it is satisfied in a Riemannian space of three dimensions, is a

physical  fact  not  dependent  on  arbitrary  definitions. The  statement  that

physical  space  has  three  dimensions  has  therefore  the  same  objective

character as, for instance, the statement that there are three physical states

of matter, the solid, liquid, and gaseous state; it describes a fundamental fact

of the objective world.

Just as in the case of the metric, one can proceed, after recognizing that the

three-dimensionality is a physical fact, to the question of its explanation, i.e.,

one can now search for a cause of the three-dimensionality of space. One

might try, for instance, to regard the three-dimensionality as a consequence of

certain  conditions  of  equilibrium  of  matter.  This  conception  would  be

justified if the three-dimensional order of matter could be shown to be the

only stable order. Any such proof presupposes certain laws of nature which

can be formulated independently of the dimensionality of space. Such a proof

might read: If space has n dimensions, and it is a general law of nature that

the attraction between masses varies inversely with the (n-1)th power of their

distance, then the dimensionality of space must be n = 3, since otherwise the

motion of the planets and also the arrangement of the masses of the stars

would  not  be  stable.  Of  course,  this  idea  cannot  be  carried  over  into

Einsteinian  geometry,  where  the  Newtonian  force  of  attraction  no  longer

plays a primary role and occurs only as an approximate solution. The proof

could also be based on a more general assumption, such as the following: If

the field equations of matter contain only differentials of second order or less,

space must have three dimensions. We mention these examples, which of

course are not intended to represent confirmed laws of nature, nor laws for

whose future confirmation we see any chance, merely in order to express the

basic  idea  of  such  an  explanation  of  the  dimensionality  of  space.  This

explanation, like any other explanation, can consist only in a combination of

two natural phenomena into one, i.e., in the derivation of one from the other.

The three-dimensionality would thus be recognized as a logical consequence

of certain fundamental properties of matter, which in turn would have to beaccepted as ultimate facts. Any other attempt at explanation would be vain.

The  three-dimensionality  of  space  cannot  be  maintained  as  an  absolute

necessity; it is a physical fact like any other, and therefore subject to the same

kind  of  explanation.  Though  some  attempts  have  been  made  to  treat  the
                                                                              111
problem  from  this  point  of  view,  as  for  instance  by  H.  Weyl   and  P.
          112
Ehrenfest, they have thus far not led to success.

We shall now turn briefly to the question of the visualization of spaces of

higher dimensionality. There can be no doubt that in a world of a higher

dimensionality  the  human  power  of  imagination  would  adapt  itself  to  its

environment  and  that  man  would  have  a  visual  picture  of  this  space

analogous to his present three-dimensional visualizations. When we try to

imagine such a picture according to the rule given by Helmholtz (p. 63),

namely, by describing experiences in a four-dimensional space (i.e., a five-

dimensional space-time manifold), we meet with certain difficulties. In such a

space even the human body would be four-dimensional, and its perceptual

apparatus would be very different. Instead of the two-dimensional retina of

the  eye,  there  would  be  a  three-dimensional  retina.  Whereas  the  visual

experience of the third dimension, the “depth,” is now achieved primarily by

the combined effect of the two eyes and is therefore qualitatively different

from  the  experience  of  the  other  two  dimensions,  the  three-dimensional

experiences  in  a  four-dimensional  space  would  be  as  immediate  as  two-

dimensional experiences in our three-dimensional space. The combined effect

of the two three-dimensional pictures on the retina would supply us with the

visual experience of the four-dimensional space. If we try to imagine such

experiences in terms of our present sensations, we shall find that there are

certain limitations. The new perceptual experience we wish to describe would

have new sense qualities that do not exist under the conditions with which we

are familiar.

We can therefore indicate only indirectly what kind of experiences would

result in such a world. For this purpose we shall use the device of substituting

for the new, unknown sense quality a known quality. Let us assume that the

three dimensions of space are visualized in the customary fashion, and let us

substitute a color for the fourth dimension. Every physical object is liable to

changes in color as well as in position. An object might, for example, be

capable  of  going  through  all  shades  from  red  through  violet  to  blue.  A

physical interaction between any two bodies is possible only if they are closeto each other in space as well as in color. Bodies of different colors would

penetrate  each  other  without  interference.  In  this  fashion  we  have  now

coordinated  to  every  point  of  the  three-dimensional  space  the  one-

dimensional continuous manifold of color from red through violet to blue.

Hence  the  combined  manifold  of  these  states  is  four-dimensional.  This

manifold  constitutes  a  space  in  the  proper  sense  because  the  principle  of

action by contact is satisfied.

All properties of a four-dimensional space may now be inferred from this

illustration. The collision of two billiard-balls, for instance, would occur as

follows: the two balls approach the same three-dimensional point, while at

the same time their colors become more and more alike. Only if they are

close  not  only  in  space,  but  also  in  color,  will  there  be  the  sound  of  a

collision. It may also happen that the two balls are at the same point in space;

but so long as their colors are different, they will penetrate each other. If they

stay at the same spot and their colors become gradually more alike, we shall

finally hear the sound of their collision at the moment when their colors are

identical. The fact that a closed three-dimensional surface no longer encloses

a spatial region will become clear from the following consideration. If we

lock a number of flies into a red glass globe, they may yet escape: they may

change their color to blue and are then able to penetrate the red globe.

The  human  body  would  be  differently  built  in  such  a  world.  It  would

extend not only in the three dimensions of space but also in the dimension of

color. It would consist of similar bodies which penetrate one another and are

somewhat different in respect to color, thus filling in continuous variation a

small interval of color. The retina would also consist of such interpenetrating

layers. Any bundle of light rays striking the eye would have an additional

dimension.  If  it  were  a  two-dimensional  bundle  in  the  three-dimensional

space, it would be three-dimensional in the four-dimensional space. We must

here imagine that every light ray is capable of assuming every color. From a

red point in space, a red ray will go to a red point of the retina. The same

point of the retina is “penetrated” completely by a blue ray traveling from a

corresponding  blue  point  in  space  to  the  corresponding  blue  point  of  the

retina. The new sense quality can now be indicated as follows. Since the

corresponding red and blue rays are received by different elements of the

retina, we would perceive them as differently located in space, just as we

perceive the direction of rays as spatially different in three dimensions if theyhit different elements of the retina. This difference in spatial localization,

which  was  replaced  in  our  example  by  a  difference  in  color,  cannot  be

perceived by three-dimensional human beings. The four-dimensional human

being would perceive the gradually increasing similarity of the colors of the

billiard  balls  as  a  change  in  spatial  position,  just  as  we  experience  the

decreasing distance between the balls in three dimensions as a change in their

positions due to the successive stimulation of different cells of the retina.

These four-dimensional changes of position, of course, need not be connected

with the phenomenon of color, since we have used color merely as a device.

Here we encounter a limit to our capacity for visualization. New sense

qualities  cannot  be  predicted:  we  can  only  use  substitutes  for  them.  This

difficulty  expresses  the  fundamental  importance  of  dimensionality.  The

visualization of events that take place in a metrically different space, or in a

topologically different space of three dimensions, is possible because these

spaces  are  Euclidean  in  the  infinitesimal,  and  perceptual  experiences  are

therefore essentially unchanged. An increase in the number of dimensions,

however,  affects  even  the  smallest  regions  and  provides  therefore  a

qualitatively different experience.

 

We can conceive special cases in which the space is four-dimensional, yet

in  which  the  perceptual  experience  is  not  different  from  that  in  three-

dimensional space. Such a case would occur if the human body, as a three-

dimensional structure, were embedded in a four-dimensional space. In this

case we can imagine what the three-dimensionally constructed human eye

would see in the four-dimensional space. This situation corresponds to one in

which two-dimensional human beings live in a three-dimensional space and

are able to perceive it. However, since there seems to be a physical law that

objects capable of physical existence must have as many dimensions as the

surrounding  space,  this  example  corresponds  to  a  world  which  cannot  be

physically realized. Another case would arise if space were four- (or more)

dimensional in its smallest elements, but three-dimensional as a whole. This

situation would correspond to the case of a thin layer of grains of sand which,

although each is three-dimensional if taken individually, taken as a whole

forms  essentially  a  two-dimensional  space.  Similarly,  atoms  which

individually  are  higher-dimensional  could  cluster  into  three-dimensional

structures. In such a world, a macroscopic structure would have only thedegrees of freedom of the three dimensions of space, while an atom would

have  many  more  degrees  of  freedom.  Sense  perceptions  in  such  a  world

would  not  be  noticeably  different  from  those  of  our  ordinary  world;  and

conversely, it is in principle possible to infer from our ordinary experiences

the higher-dimensional character of the microscopic world. Incidentally, it is

not impossible that quantum mechanics will lead to such results.


§ 45. THE REALITY OF SPACE AND TIME

  Statements about the topological properties turn out to be the most reliable

ones we can make about the order of space and time; they apply even to the

most general gravitational fields. We said in § 39 that the Gauss-Riemann

separation of coordinate system and metric leaves to the coordinate system

the function of characterizing the topological properties of a space. We may

therefore regard the following statement as the most general assertion about

space-time  order:  everywhere  and  at  all  times  there  exists  a space-time

coordinate system.

This result implies the topological distinguishability of space and time. In

a space-time coordinate system one of the dimensions is to be considered as

time and the three others as space. The division into timelike and spacelike

directions is accomplished by the world-lines of light. In Fig. 49 the dividing

lines are drawn, in Fig. 49a for the special theory of relativity, in Fig. 49b for

the general theory of relativity.

The second diagram differs considerably from the first in its metric, while it

is topologically equivalent to it. In both diagrams we have indicated by a

dotted  line  a  timelike  world-line  (with  arrow)  and  a  spacelike  world-line

(without arrow). It can easily be seen how the angular regions traversed by

these lines can be characterized topologically with reference to the arrows of

the world-lines of light: timelike world-lines pass through the angular region

between those branches of the lines that have arrows, while spacelike world-

lines pass through the angular region between one branch with an arrow and

one  without  an  arrow.  If  we  were  to  draw  in  the  same  manner  a  set  of

timelike and a set of spacelike world-lines, they would represent a space-time

coordinate system (a real system).

It is of course not necessary to describe a manifold of the type of Fig. 49

by such a coordinate system. We could obtain a unique description also by

means of two sets of spacelike lines. However, the fact that a topologicallydivided coordinate system can be chosen expresses a most important property

of the physical world.



















 
  Fig. 49 a and b. The topological divisibility of a space-time manifold.



We  can  visualize  the  situation  regarding  the  space-time  manifold  as

follows.  A  space-time  coordinate  system  is  obtained  if  space  points  are

numbered in some continuous fashion and time is measured by clocks the

simultaneity of which is defined in such a manner that it connects only events

indeterminate as to time order (as described in A., p. 152). But we could

replace the time determination by a completely different one. Let us suppose

that all over the space there is a downpour of projectiles which are numbered

consecutively. Instead of the time indication we may then use as the fourth

coordinate the number of the projectile closest to the event to be described.

The coordinate system thus obtained is not a real system (its simultaneity

cross-section  lies  in  the  region  of  temporal  succession),  but  it  supplies  a

unique determination of all of the events. We dealt with an unreal system of a

different kind in § 38, where we recognized that a rotating system of axes

becomes  unreal  beyond  a  certain  distance  from  the  center.  We  therefore

cannot  say  that  the  choice  of  a  space-time  divided  coordinate  system  is

necessary; but that it is always possible means the same as that the space-

time manifold can be divided topologically.

 This result leads to the question whether the possibility of such a choice of

coordinates is derivable from the validity of the special theory of relativity in

infinitesimal domains. For the time being such a proof is possible only for

cut-out  regions.  See  also  A.,  p.  154.  The  possibility  of  such  a  choice  of

coordinates for the world as a whole would therefore have to be asserted as a

special axiom.

 

The  fact  that  an  ordering  of  all  events  is  possible  within  the  three

dimensions of space and the one dimension of time is the most fundamental

aspect of the physical theory of space and time. In comparison, the possibility

of a metric seems to be of subordinate significance. It is only the metric,

however, which, in the general theory of relativity has been recognized as an

effect of the gravitational field. The essence of space-time order, its topology,

remains an ultimate fact of nature, unaffected by these considerations. We

must therefore content ourselves with the statement that an ordering in terms

of space-time coordinates is possible. The explanation of topology would still

be incomplete even if we were to find the explanation of three-dimensionality

discussed in the previous section. The three-dimensionality represents one of

the topological properties of space and time, and any explanation would have

to start with the assumption that some continuous order of space and time

exists.

  Other attempts have been made to explain the topology of space and time.

The coordinate system assigns to the system of coincidences, of point-events,

a mutual order that is independent of any metric. This order of coincidences

must therefore be understood as an ultimate fact. The attempt has been made

to justify this order as necessary; it has been regarded as a function of the

human perceptual apparatus rather than of the objective world. Accordingly,

it has been claimed that sense perceptions supply directly only coincidences,

and  that  the  ultimate  element  of  space-time  order  is  determined  by  the

character of our sense perceptions. In this connection appeal is made to the

experimental methods of the physicist, in which coincidences of dials and

pointers play an important role.

This view is untenable. First of all, it is obvious that we cannot regard the

order of coincidences as immediately given, since the subjective order of

perceptions does not necessarily correspond to the objective order of external

events. It can serve only as the basis of a complicated procedure by which theobjective order is inferred. This difference is due to the fact that perceptions

form a one-dimensional chain, while objective point events belong to a four-

dimensional manifold. We must therefore introduce rules for the construction

of the objective order; such rules have been formulated in the topological

coordinative definitions.

It is a serious mistake to identify a coincidence, in the sense of a point-

event of the space-time order, with a coincidence in the sense of a sense
            113
experience.  The  latter  is subjective  coincidence,  in  which  sense

perceptions are blended; for instance, the experience of sound can be blended

with  the  impression  of  light.  The  former,  on  the  other  hand,  is objective

coincidence, in which physical things, such as atoms, billiard balls or light

rays collide and which can take place even when no observer is present. The

space-time order deals only with objective coincidences, and we go outside

the realm of its problems in asking how the system of objective coincidences

is  related  to  the  corresponding  subjective  system.  The  analysis  of  this

question belongs to that part of epistemology that explains the connection

between objective reality, on the one hand, and consciousness and perception

on  the  other.  Let  us  say  here  only  that  any  statement  about  objective

coincidences  has  the  same  epistemological  status  as  any  other  statement

concerning a physical fact.

It is therefore not possible to reduce the topology of space and time to

subjective  grounds  springing  from  the  nature  of  the  observer.  On  the

contrary,  we  must  specify  the  principles  according  to  which  an  objective

coincidence is to be ascertained. This means that we must indicate a method

how to decide whether a physical event is to be considered as one, or as two

or more separate point events. Such methods are frequently employed by the

physicist,  although  he  is  usually  not  aware  of  this  fact.  He  decides,  for

example,  that  the  movement  of  a  particle  in  Brownian  motion  is  to  be

represented not as one coincidence, but as a great number of spatially and

temporally  separate  coincidences,  whose  integral  effect  is  observed.  The

general  basis  of  all  such  procedures  was  explained  in  §  43,  where  we

demonstrated  that  the  principle  of  action  by  contact  is  decisive  for  the

determination of the dimensionality of space. In the example given there, we

investigated the question whether a certain event is to be considered as one

point-event  in  a  two-dimensional  space,  or  as  two  point-events  in  a  one-

dimensional  space.  Any  such  decision  depends  on  the  question,  in  whichcoordinate system the principle of action by contact is satisfied, although

both systems appear at first to be equally adequate. This procedure is used by

the physicist to decide what constitutes a point-event: occurrences are point-

events,  if  the  assumption  that  they  are  point-events,  in  combination  with

observation, leads to the conclusion that the principle of action by contact is

satisfied.

  Objective coincidences are therefore physical events like any others; their

occurrence  can  be  confirmed  only  within  the  context  of  theoretical

investigation. Since all happenings have until now been reducible to objective

coincidences, we must consider it the most general empirical fact that the

physical world is a system of coincidences. It is this fact on which all spatio-

temporal order is based, even in the most complicated gravitational fields.

What kind of physical occurrences are coincidences, however, is not uniquely

determined by empirical evidence, but depends again on the totality of our

theoretical knowledge.

The most important result of these considerations is the objectivity of the

properties  of  space. The  reality  of  space  and  time  turns  out  to  be  the

irrefutable consequence of our epistemological analyses, which have led us

through  many  important  individual  problems.  This  result  is  somewhat

obscured by the appearance of an element of arbitrariness in the choice of the

description.  But  in  showing  that  the  arbitrariness  pertains  to  coordinative

definitions we could make a precise statement about the empirical component

of  all  space-time  descriptions.  Philosophers  have  thus  far  considered  an

idealistic interpretation of space and time as the only possible epistemological

position, because they overlooked the twofold nature of the mathematical and

the physical problems of space. Mathematical space is a conceptual structure,

and  as  such ideal.  Physics  has  the  task  of  coordinating  one  of  these

mathematical  structures  to reality.  In  fulfilling  this  task,  physics  makes

statements about reality, and it has been our aim to free the objective core of

these  assertions  from  the  subjective  additions  introduced  through  the

arbitrariness in the choice of the description. A deeper understanding of this

problem would of course be possible only if we were to enter into a detailed

analysis  of  the  problem  of  reality  and  description,  i.e.,  the  problem  of

physical knowledge in general. It may suffice at this place to remark that the

problem  concerning  space  and  time  is  not  different  from  that  of  the

description of any other physical state as expressed in physical laws.If the properties of space and time reflect laws of nature, however, their

physical  treatment  requires  an  essential  correction.  We  can  employ  the

concepts of space and time only so long as there are phenomena that realize

them. At present the existence of such phenomena has been confirmed only

for the macrocosm. All of the physical concepts basic to the order of space

and time, namely, rigid bodies, clocks, causal chains, coincidences, refer to

macrocosmic phenomena. We cannot be sure that they can be extended to the

microcosm,  i.e.,  the  world  of  the  interior  of  the  atom.  In  addition  to  the

concept of coincidence, only the concept of causal chain has some prospects

for  such  an  extension.  If  we  have  hopes  that  a  space-time  order  can  be

constructed even for the smallest elements of matter, this optimism derives

from the circumstance that it was the concept of causal chain which proved to

be the ultimate basis of the space-time order of the macrocosm, when all

other means to establish an order had failed in the most general gravitational

fields.  A  final  decision  with  regard  to  this  problem  must  be  postponed,

however, until the problem of matter, at present in the focus of scientific
                              114
research, has been solved.INDEX








          absence of interior curvature
          absolute: spacetime transport time
          absolutism
            acceleration
          action at a distance
          action by contact
          addition theorem
            adjustment
          Adler, F.
          advance of the perihelion
          algebraic sum
          ampere
          analysis situs
          analytic treatment of geometry
          and
          Anderson
          angular measurement
          a priori : character of geometry epistemologically postulate principles theory of space
          visual
          a prioristic philosophy of space
          approximation
          artificial manifold
          atom clock
          axiom of the parallels
          axiomatic: construction method system

          badly drawn figures
          bending of light
          Benedict
          between axioms definition of
            betweenness order of relation of
          Bieberbach, L.
          Blumenfeld, W.          Bohr, N.
          Bolyai, J.
          Bonola, R.
            Buchenau, A.
 
          Carnap, R.
          Cassirer, E.
          Cauchy-Riemann conditions of integrability
          casual:  anomaly  chain  propagation  relation  theory  of  time  theory  of  space  and  time
          structure
          causality
            cause-effect relation
          cause: of gravitation of inertia
          celarent
          central plane
          centrifugal: field force
          centro-symmetrical process
          certainty
          c.g.s. unit
          change of shape
            characteristic: length time
          choice of the coordinative definition
          chord
          Christoffel
          circle paradox
          circular: argument orbits
            circumference of the earth
          Clarke, S.
          classical physics
          clock paradox
          closed: causal chain curve space surface system to a certain degree of approximation
          coefficient of expansion
          coefficients of heat expansion
          cognition
          Cohn, E.
          coincidence
          comparison of distant events of neighboring events of rest-length of moving line-segments
          concatenation
          concave: surface
          conceptual definition
          congruence definition of simple definition of spatial temporal
          connectivity
          consistent extension
          constancy of the velocity of light
          continuity
          contraction factor
            contradiction
          convention
          conventionalism
          convex: mirror surface          coordinate: space system time
          coordinative definition metrical topological
          coordinative operation
          Copernicus
          Coriolis force
          correction factors
          covariant magnitude
          curvature: constant of degree zero of light negative positive of space of the surface of the
          sphere
          cut-out region

          decagon
          deductive system
          definition conceptual explicit of meter
          degrees of freedom
            demonstrable science
          depth
          Descartes, R.
          description of nature
            descriptive simplicity
          determinism
          diagram of a gas
          diameter
          difference: apparent real
          different physical states
          differential forces
          differential principle
          directionality
            divergence
          Doppler effect
          drawing
          Driesch, H.

          earlier than
          earth clock
          Ehrenfest, P.
          Einstein, A.
          Einstein: contraction effects gravitational field
          Einsteinian space
          elastic propagation
          electric: bell charge
            electrodynamics
            electromagnetic wave
          electron
          element
          empirical theory of physical geometry
          enclosure relativity of
          Engel, F.
          energy
          entropy
          epicycles            epistemology
          equivalence of hypotheses
          equivalent descriptions
          errors of observation
          estimate by sight
          ether
          Euclid
          Euclidean geometry as simplest
            Euclidicity
          example of twins
          exclusion of causal connection
          expansion factor
          extension
          exterior curvature

          family of spheres
          field: equations of force of heat
          finite: interval limit
          finiteness
          first comparison of length in kinematics
          first-signal
            five-dimensional space-time manifold
          Fizeau, A.
          Flamm, L.
          focal-plane shutter photograph
          force destroying coincidence exterior interior
            four-dimensional manifold
            four-dimensional space
            four-dimensional space-time continuum : metrical structure of
            four-dimensionality
            Friedländer, B. and J.
            fundamental: circle geometrical form metrical form sphere

          Galileo’s transformation
          gas law
          Gauss, K.
          Gaussian measure of curvature
          genidentity
          geodesic
          geometry: mathematical physical of the spherical surface and gravitation
          geometric empiricism
          geometrical: axioms form sum
            geometrization of gravitation
          Gestalt
          Görland, A.
          gradient
          graphical representation
            gravitation-free spaces
          gravitation as universal force
          gravitational: charge field gradient field mass potential field tensor
          great circle          greater than
          greatest length

          heat
          Hegel, W.
          v. Helmholtz, H.
          Hertz, P.
          Hilbert, D.
            Hillebrand, F.
          holistic property
          Huyghens, C.
            hydrodynamics

          identical
          identification of metrical and gravitational field
          identity of gravitational and inertial mass of individual of light- and matter-geometry
            image-producing function
          implication
            implicational
          implicit definition
          improper concept
          indefinite metric
            indeterminate as to time order
          indicator
          indirect definition
          inertial: field mass system
          inference
            infinitesimal domain
            infinitesimal element of a curve
          infinity of space
          interior: curvature forces
          interval
            intuitionism
          invariant
          Ives, H.

          Kant, I.
          Kantian
          kinetic energy
          Klein, F.
          Klein’s Euclidean model of non-Euclidian geometry
          Kopff, A.
          v. Kries, J.

          Lange, L.
          later than
          v. Laue, M.
          law: of conservation of energy of inertia of mechanics
          Leibniz, G.
          length of moving line-segment
          Lewin, K.
          Liebmann. H.          light: axioms clock geometry ray wave year
            light-geometrical definition of length
          limit of velocity of causal propagation
          limiting character of the velocity of light
          line
          linear transformation
          line element of second order
          living organism
            Lobatschewsky, N.
          logic
          logical: impossibility proof relations
          Lorentz, H.
          Lorentz transformation

          Mach, E.
          main: circle radii of space sphere
          manifold: four-dimensional space-time multi-dimensional of tones.
          mapping
          mark
          mass point
          masses of stars
            mathematical: geometry physics
          matter: axioms geometry tensor
          measure of curvature
          mechanics
          Mercury
            merry-go-round
          metric: definite indefinite of a space
          metrical: coefficient field form relations tensor uniqueness of light
          metrogenic
            metrokinematic
          Michelson experiment
          Minkowski, H.
          mirror-image congruence
          monotonically increasing function
          motion: apparent of light of a pendulum of planets real
          Müller, W.

          natural clocks
          Neo-Kantian
          Newton, I.
          Newtonian:  inertial  system  law  of  gravitation  principle  of  relativity  theory  theory  of
          gravitation
            non-Archimedian
            non-contractible closed curves
          non-Euclidean geometry two-dimensional visualization of
            non-Pascalian
            non-separating curves
          normal: causality system
          normative function
          now          now-points
          null lines
          number of dimensions

          objective meaning
          one-to-one correspondence
          optics
          or
          order of the line element
          order relations

          pail experiment
          parallelism of events
          parameter space
          Pasch, M.
          pendulum clock
          pentagon
          perceptions
          perceptual space parallelism in
          period
          periodic processes
          perspective
          Petzold, J.
            phenomenological analysis
          philosophy of nature
          physical forces geometry reality space states of matter
          physics of everyday life
          plane
          planeness in the smallest elements
          planetary orbits
          pocket watch
          Poincaré, H.
          point
          point-event
          Poisson equation
          polygon of thousand sides
          possible
          potential gradient
          practical geometry
          precession of the earth’s axis
            preestablished harmony
          preserving coincidences
          principle:  of  causality  of  equivalence  of  general  covariance  of  the  identity  of
          indiscernibles of the limiting character of the velocity of light of relativity of the relativity
          of geometry of the uniqueness of light
            probability
          process
          Proclus
          projective geometry
          proof of consistency
          propagation of gravitation            pseudo-problem

                Ptolemy
                Pythagorean theorem

          qualititative properties
          quantum theory

          real: space system world
          reality of space and time
          really equal
          red shift
          related system
          relation asymmetrical symmetrical
          relative: concept product rest
          relativistic: dynamics kinematics mechanics
          relativity: dynamic of geometry kinematic of relative motion of simultaneity of time
          rest: coordinative definition of -length -system
          retardation of clocks
          Riehl, A.
          Riemann, B.
            Riemannian curvature tensor
            Riemannian generalization of geometry
            Riemannian geometry integral properties of metric of topology of
            Riemannian space
          right angle
          rigid body
          rigid system
          rigidity
          ring curve
          rotation
          rotational field
          round-trip axiom
          rule of consistency
          rule of consistent extension

          scalar: field potential sum theory of gravitation
          Schelling, F.
          Schlick, M.
          scholastic schema
          scientific philosophy
          second comparison of length in kinematics
          self-consistent
          self-evidence
          sense qualities
          shape of moving object
          signal chain
            significance of an example
          similarity transformation
          simplicity of definition of Euclidean geometry
          simultaneity  definition  of  absolute  at  different  places  at  the  same  place  relativity  of
          transitivity of unique            simultaneous
            sound-geometry
          source of light
          space  dimension  mathematical  measurement  of  physical  real  spherical  tensor  twofold
          nature of
          spacelike
          space-time: coordinate system metric objects order tensor
          spatial: congruence of stationary systems depth order
          speculative
          spherical: mirror space surface wave
          spring balance clock
          Stäckel, P.
          standard meter
          state of motion of the observer
          static field of gravitation
          stationary: fields systems
            stereographic projection
          straight line central
          straightest line
          subjective coincidence
          subjective order of perceptions
            subjectivity of the observer
          substance
          surface: closed geometry
          surveying
            synchronization symmetrical transitive
          synthetic
          synthetic a priori : judgments of pure intuition
          system of coincidences

          tacit assumptions
          tautology
          technical impossibility
          tensor field potential
          theorem
          theorem θ
          theorems of similarity
          theory: of relations of sets of surfaces
          theory of relativity general philosophical physical special
          thermometer
          time: axis as fourth dimension as experience of an inertial field measurement; metric order
          order at the same point pure of a static gravitational field
          timelike
          topological equivalence form function
          topologically: different divided coordinate system equivalent related
          topology of space
          torus
          transform away
            transformation: unique and continuous
          translation
          transport synchronization          triplet of numbers
          true length of moving rod
          truth of the axioms

          unidirectional
          uniformity definition of of time
          union of space and time
          uniqueness of present moment of time order
          unit: of length of time
          universal: deformation field of force forces
          univocal
          unreal: sequence system

          vector calculus
          velocity above velocity of light of light of sound
          visual: angle estimate geometry integration space
          visualization empirical of
          Euclidean geometry form of geometrical of non-Euclidean geometry pure space of of
          spaces of higher dimensionality

          watch
          wave-length of Cadmium light
          wave theory of light
            Weber-Wellstein
          weight
          Weyl, H.
            world-geometry
          world-lines spacelike timelike
          Wulf, Th.1   Braunschweig 1924, Friedrich Vieweg and Son, A.G. (in the following

referred to as A.).


2   Euclid distinguished between axioms, postulates and definitions. We may

be allowed for our present purpose to include all these concepts under the

name of axioms.


3   For a more detailed presentation see § 11.


4   Hilbert later proved the consistency of Euclidean geometry by a reduction

to arithmetic. The consistency of arithmetic, which can no longer be proved

by reduction, needs a separate proof; this most important problem, which has

found  an  elaborate  treatment  by  Hilbert  and  his  school,  is  still  under

discussion.


5      Klein  did  not  start  his  investigations  with  the  avowed  purpose  of

establishing a proof of consistency; the proof came about inadvertently, so to

speak, as a result of the construction of the model carried out with purely

mathematical  intentions.  L.  Bieberbach  has  shown  recently  that  the

recognition of the significance of non-Euclidean geometry was the result of

long years of struggle. Berl. Akademieber. 1925, phys.-math. Klasse, p. 381.

See Bonola-Liebmann, Nichteuklidische Geometrie, Leipzig 1921 and Engel-

Stäckel, Theorie der Parallellinien von Euklid bis Gauss, Leipzig 1895, for

the earlier history of the axiom of the parallels.


6   The axiom of the parallels is independent of the other axioms of Euclid

only in so far as it asserts the existence of at most one parallel; that there

exists at least one parallel can be demonstrated in terms of the other axioms.

This fact is stated with masterful precision in Euclid’s work.


7   Cf. p. 148f about the connection of the axiom of the parallels with the

metric.


8   It is evident, in considering the spherical surface, that two great circles

will intersect in two points; hence, the denial of the axiom that two straight

lines can intersect in only one point is involved. For if all of the axioms of

Euclidean geometry except the parallel axiom are unchanged it is possible to

prove there is at least one parallel. In the treatment of the spherical surface,however,  we  have  seen  that  this  theorem  does  not  hold.  This  theorem

depends upon the axiom that straight lines intersect in only one point; hence

its denial removes the inconsistency.


9   Cf. the more detailed presentation in § 39.


10   M. Schlick, Allgemeine Erkenntnislehre, Springer, Berlin 1918, Ziff. 10.


11   Cf. § 39 and § 46.


12      H.  v.  Helmholtz, Schriften  zur  Erkenntnistheorie,  ed.  by  Hertz  and

Schlick, Springer, Berlin 1921, p. 19.


13   H. Reichenbach, Relativitätstheorie und Erkenntnis a priori, Springer,

Berlin, 1920.





14   Generally the force F is a tensor. If g′ are the metrical coefficients of
                                                  µv

the geometry G′ and g those of G, the potentials F of the force F are
                          µvµv

given by

                              g′ + F = g µv = 1, 2, 3
                                  µvµvµv

    The measuring rods furnish directly the g′; the F, are the “correction
                                                      µvµv

    factors” by which the g′ are corrected so that g results. The universal
                                µvµv

    force F  influencing  the  measuring  rod  is  usually  dependent  on  the

    orientation of the measuring rod. About the mathematical limitation of

    theorem θ cf. §12.


15   The antithesis Kant-Helmholtz has been interpreted by Neo-Kantians (in

particular  by  Riehl, Kantstudien  9,  p.  261f.,  less  plainly  by  Görland,

NatorpFestschrift, p. 94f) not as a contradiction but as a misunderstanding of

Kant by Helmholtz. The same argument has been advanced by Neo-Kantians

recently  with  respect  to  Einstein’s  theory.  This  conception  is  due  to  an

underestimation of the differences between the points of view, and it would

be in the interest of a general clarification if the patent contradiction between

the only possible modern philosophy of space and Kant were admitted. Such

an admission avoids the danger of an interpretation of Kant’s philosophy toovague to retain any concrete content. The author presented his ideas on the

subject  in  “Der  gegenwärtige  Stand  der  Relativitätsdiskussion,” Logos X,

1922, section III, p. 341. Cf. also p. 31. (The English translation of this paper

will  be  included  in  a  forthcoming  volume  of Selected  Essays  by  Hans

Reichenbach, to be published by Routledge and Kegan Paul, London.)


16      Cf.  the  new  edition  by  Hertz  and  Schlick, Helmholtz’

Erkenntnistheoretische Schriften, Berlin 1921.


17   This is also true of the expositions by Poincaré, to whom we owe the

designation  of  the  geometrical  axioms  as  conventions  (Science  and

Hypothesis, Dover Publications, Inc. 1952, p. 50) and whose merit it is to

have spread the awareness of the definitional character of congruence to a

wider audience. He overlooks the possibility of making objective statements

about real space in spite of the relativity of geometry and deems it impossible

to “discover in geometric empiricism a rational meaning” (op. cit., p. 79). Cf.

§ 44.


18   This axiom was first formulated by Pasch. Cf. D. Hilbert, Foundations of

Geometry, The Open Court Publishing Co., Chicago, 1921. p. 6.


19   This conception is suggested by F. Klein, Elementarmathematik vom

höheren Standpunkte aus, Vol. II, p. 192f. Springer, Berlin 1925.


20   It is the logarithm of the cross-ratio formed by the two points and the

points of intersection of the chord with the circle. Cf. H. Weyl, Space- Time-

Matter, Methuen & Co. Ltd., London, 1922, p. 82.


21   He could also say that a contraction occurs in radial position, whereas

there  is  no  change  in  tangential  position;  the  two  descriptions  would  be

equivalent.  The  second  one  would  correspond  to  the  relations  of  the

projection  of Fig.  2.  We  choose  the  first  one  because  it  facilitates  the

following presentation. In Fig. 6,  therefore,  the  distances AB and BC  are

equal in length, whereas in Fig. 2, BC is shorter. Fig. 6 is not obtained from

the  surface G  of Fig.  2  by  parallel  projection  but  by  a  projection  that

preserves the lengths of the meridians, yet expands the parallel circles. In

dealing with the field of gravitation in the neighborhood of a mass point,

Einstein chooses the second description and speaks of a contraction of theradial measuring rod. (Ann. d. Phys. 49, 1916, § 22.) The resulting relations

are similar to those described here; the only difference is that the contraction

increases rather than decreases when the center is approached. In the center

(or  even  in  its  vicinity)  we  find  a  singularity.  It  is  the  geometry  of  a

paraboloid  originating  from  the  rotation  of  a  parabola  around  its  vertex

tangent  (or  around  straight  lines  outside  the  parabola  and  parallel  to  the

tangent). Cf. L. Flamm, Physikal Zeitschrift 17, 1916, p. 438.


22   By betweenness we shall understand the relation indicated by the word

“between.”


23   There are cases in which a curve cannot be contracted to a point, yet it

divides the surface into two separate domains, such as the ring curve on an

infinite cylinder. The corresponding ring curve on the torus, however, has the

same properties as the curves drawn in Fig. II of the plate.


24   Schriften zur Erkenntnistheorie,  edited  by  Hertz  and  Schlick,  Berlin

1921, p. 5. This formulation by Helmholtz, in connection with his examples

constructed according to this principle, has opened the way for the solution of

the problem of the visualization of geometry.


25      The  latter  interpretation  is  possible  only  from  the  standpoint  of

determinism, for otherwise the permanence of the strict parallelism would be

infinitely improbable.


26   My refutation of the Kantian system, presented in Relativitätstheorie und

Erkenntnis a priori, Berlin, 1920, p. 29, is based on this idea; the present

exposition  is  a  still  better  example  of  a  contradiction  between a  priori

principles than the one presented in the earlier publication, which is not quite

correct.


27      “Drawing”  is  conceived  here  as  a  mapping  upon  a  small  three-

dimensional volume; the pictures in the plane of the drawing are projections

of this figure.


28   It should be pointed out that this assumption does not correspond to the

conditions of the general theory of relativity, since according to it light rays

move along four-dimensional straightest lines, so that even in the static fieldof gravitation this phenomenon does no lead to straightest lines of three-

dimensional  space.  Cf.  Axiomatik  der  relativistichen  Raum-Zeit-Lehre,  p.

128 (hereafter referred to as A.) The deviation, however, is very small in the

case of a weak curvature.


29   Cf. F. Klein, Elementarmathematik vom höheren Standpunkte aus, Berlin

1925, Vol. II, p. 142—143.


30   H. Driesch, Relativitätstheorie und Philosophie. Karlsruhe 1924, p. 43—

45.


31   J. v. Kries, Logik. Tübingen 1916, p. 705.


32   Kant, Critique of Judgment, Introduction, Chapter V.


33   The simplicity of Euclidean geometry is also expressed by the fact that

the  differential  element  of  non-Euclidean  spaces  is  Euclidean.  This  fact,

however, is analogous to the relations between a straight line and a curve, and

cannot lead to an epistemological priority of Euclidean geometry, in contrast

to the views of certain authors.


34   The German term Anschauung is translated here as visualization. The

latter term appears preferable to the usual translation by the term intuition,

which has a mystical connotation not intended by Kant.


35   Ibid., p. 44.


36   See F. Hillebrand, “Theorie der scheinbaren Grösse bei binokularem

Sehen,” Wiener  Akademieberichte  1902,  math.-naturwiss.  Klasse;  W.

Blumenfeld,  “Untersuchungen  über  die  scheinbare  Grösse  im  Sehraume,”

Ztschr. f. Psychologie 65, 1912, p. 252.


37   Blumenfeld, op. cit., pp. 323 and 346. “Directional condition” means:

one  should  concentrate  on  the  apparently  equal  direction  of  the  lines.

“Distance condition” means: one should concentrate on the apparent equal

perpendicular distances. Some subjects in the experiments showed a third

variation  when  they  concentrated  on  the  “perpendicularity  to  the  frontal

plane.”38   We have in mind the commonly used drafting device with a straightedge

pivoted on a crossbar. Fixed in place by a screw, it can draw parallels in any

arbitrary direction.


39   Compare this with p. 100.


40   We must also reject the epistemological equivalence between perception

in physics and visualization in mathematics.


41   See also the presentation by Schlick, Allgemeine Erkenntnislehre, Berlin

1918, pp. 30f. Our criticism of the theory of visualization corresponds in

many  respects  to  the  presentation  by  Schlick  (ibid.,  p.  297),  whose

investigation of this question has become fundamental. For a comprehensive

presentation of space as a relational structure which is particularly valuable

because  of  well-chosen  examples,  see  also  Carnap, Der Raum,  Chapter  I

(Ergänzungsheft der Kantstudien 1922).


42   Compare this with the restrictions given on p. 97.


                          2
43   D. Hilbert, op. cit. Op. cit., p. 6.


44   For further explanation of logical symbolism, see the author’s Elements

of Symbolic Logic, New York 1947, §§ 6—7, 17—18.


45   By means of stereographic projection (Fig. 9, p. 69) we can coordinate

each spherical surface to a plane of projection. Each circle through P on the

spherical surface is coordinated to a straight line in the corresponding plane

of  projection.  This  proves  our  assertion  if  we  consider  arbitrary  spheres

through P. It is evident that in the above table a complicated function must be

substituted for the congruence of the Euclidean metric. See Weber-Wellstein,

Enzyklopädie der Elementarmathematik, Teubner 1905, Vol. II, pp. 34f and

52f.


46   The symbols mean: S = subject term, M = middle term, P = predicate, A

= universal affirmation, E = universal denial, I = particular affirmation, O =

particular denial. If the two premises are arbitrarily given in their logical

form, the conclusion is determined. The symbols A and E of the premises

have already determined the corresponding symbol of the conclusion. Logicalconsiderations determine what that symbol should be. In this case it is E. See

the presentation of logic by I. v. Kries, Logik, p. 662, Tübingen, 1916.


47   F. Klein, Elementarmathematik vom höheren Standpunkte aus, Vol. II, p.

174, Berlin 1925.


48   The relative product is the relation resulting from the “arrangement in

series” of two relations. The relation brother-in-law is the relative product

brother-spouse (or also husband-sister).


49   α and β are arbitrary constants.


50   It is easy to recognize that the measure of force depends on the measure
                                                    —2
of time which appears in the dimensions mlt of force. A force is measured

by the acceleration which it produces. If the measure of time were redefined

in a suitable fashion, the acceleration of a freely falling body would not be

constant and the gravitational force would vary with time.


51   The elliptic motion of the earth around the sun is a periodic process. The

point at which the earth is closest to the sun, the perihelion, may be regarded

as  the  end  of  a  period.  This,  however,  is  not  an  inertial  motion,  but  a

gravitational motion.


52   E. Mach, The Science of Mechanics, The Open Court Publishing Co.,

Chicago and London, 1919, p. 223.


53      This  mechanism  was  described  by  F.  Adler,  in Ortszeit, Systemzeit,

Zonenzeit, Vienna 1920, p. 81.


54      This  requirement  is  actually  carried  out  in  Einstein’s  theory  of

gravitation. At the same time, however, the Newtonian laws are recognized as

approximations in yet another sense.


55   A presentation of causal order which does not use the principle of the

mark, but which of course presupposes certain schematizations, was given by

the  author  in  “Die  Kausalstruktur  der  Welt  und  der  Unterschied  von

Vergangenheit  und  Zukunft,” Berichte  der  Bayrischen  Akademie,  math.

naturwiss.  Abh.,  1925,  p.  133.  This  more  rigorous  presentation  is  notpossible,  however,  without  an  introduction  of  the  concept  of  probability.

Reference is also made to a remark in my book Axiomatik der relativistischen

Raum-Zeit-Lehre,  Braunschweig,  1924,  p.  133,  which  refers  to  a  possible

connection of the mark principle with the second law of thermodynamics.


56   This is often denoted by the term genidentity. The term was introduced

by K. Lewin, in Der Begriff der Genese, Berlin 1922.


57   This means that the first signal itself would not be a signal, but the limit

of all signals. Consequently, two events connected by a first-signal would not

yet be temporally ordered. This justifies our subsequent assertion that in this

case E would be indeterminate as to time order relative to E′.
      0


58   A., § 26.


59   More precisely, the projection of A′ is the same point-event as before,

whereas the projection of B′ is a point-event which stands in the relation later

than to the previously used corresponding point-event.


60   Einstein’s formulation usually is different, because he uses only the

special definition of simultaneity (1, § 19) for each coordinate system, and

consequently the state of motion of the segment determines at the same time

the definition of simultaneity which is to be used. We therefore have s = s(v),

which reduces (l) to l(ν); thus the length of a moving segment depends only

on its velocity.


61   Lecture given at the 80th Versammlung Deutscher Natuvfovscher und

Ärzte in Cologne, Sept. 21, 1908.


62      We  shall  present  at  this  point  only  a  summary.  For  a  complete

presentation we must refer to A. The numbers of the axioms and definitions

in the following pages are given in accordance with those in A.


63   A monotonically increasing function y = f(x) is a function such that y

always increases with increasing values of x, though the rate of increase may

vary irregularly.


64   The line indicates that the expression refers to the time interval and not tothe spatial distance.


65   This assertion requires a special proof; see A., § 7.


66   We are using here the customary notation, which omits the summation

sign. Instead we are using the rule that one has to sum over every index that

appears twice. Formula (3a) therefore represents four equations, the right side

of each of which is a sum of four terms. In (3b) we use an extension of this

notation. The summation is made over m, but the square bracket indicates the

rule that when m = 4 the corresponding term is to be written with a minus

sign.


67   For a precise calculation of this case we must refer to § 16 in A. For a

correction to A., see also Zs. f. Phys. 34, 1925, page 34.


68   The latter transforms the left-hand side of (2) into the same expression in

the variables x, which however is multiplied by a factor λ(x′ ... x′). Only if
                114

the right-hand side equals 0, as in (1), this transformation leaves (2) invariant,

since we can divide by λ in this case.


69   It is even permissible to choose curved lines as the coordinate axes. The

restriction  of  the  time  axis  to  a  straight  line  signifies  the  restriction  to  a

uniformly moving system in the sense of § 24, and the restriction of the space

axis to a straight line means that  in the definition of simultaneity (2, § 19) is

constant and therefore independent of position and time.


70   I shall use the terms “characteristic time” and “characteristic length” as

translations of the German terms “Eigenzeit” and “Eigenlange.”—M.R.


71   I refer here to the experiments of H. Ives on the transverse Doppler effect

in cathode rays. For this question see also A., §§ 23-24.


72   This is the opinion of J. Petzold, Die Stellung der Relativitätstheorie in

der geistigen Entwicklung der Menschheit, Dresden 1921, page 104.


73   Cf., e.g., A. Kopff, Grundzüge der Einsteinschen Relativitätstheorie,

Leipzig 1921, pages 117 and 189.74   It does not follow, of course, from this experiment alone. See A., §§ 21,

24.


75   See Zs. ƒ. Phys. 34, 1925, pp. 44f.


76   An exception is the propagation of gravitional forces, which however

according to Einstein also travel with the speed of light.


77   E. Cohn, Physikalisches über Raum und Zeit, Teubner 1910 and later ed.


78   J. Petzold, Verh. d.d. phys. Ges. 1919, p. 495.


79   See A., §§ 14—15, where the Lorentz transformation is derived via the

Galilei-transformation and where it is explained that the difference between

the two transformations is merely definitional.


80      For  the  general  case  see  M.  v.  Laue, Relativitäts-Prinzip,  Vol.  I.

Braunschweig 1913, p. 46.


81   It can easily be shown that if u < c and v < c, then alsow<c.


82      See  A.  Buchenau  and  Ernst  Cassirer, G.  W.  Leibniz  Philosophische

Werke (4 vols.) : Hauptschriften zur Grundlegung der Philosophie (2 vols.,

Leipzig, 1924) vol. I, p.120 f.


83      Newton,  Naturalis  Philosophiae  Principia  Mathematica,  Definitions.

English translation by Motte and Cajori, Berkeley, 1947, p. 6.


84   Op. cit., p. 12.


85   This view is not precisely formulated by Leibniz, but it may legitimately

be extrapolated from a passage in his Dynamics (Gerhardt-Pertz, Leibnizens

mathe-matische Schriften, VI, 1860, p. 197) and also from his defense of the

relativity of motion in the exchange of letters with Clarke.


86   Gerhardt. op. cit. p. 507.


87      See  Reichenbach,  “Die  Bewegungslehre  bei  Newton,  Leibniz  und

Huyghens,” Kantstudien 29, 1924, p. 432, where a detailed treatment of thisproblem is given. [The English translation of this paper will be included in

the forthcoming volume of Selected Essays to be published by Routledge and

Kegan Paul, London.—M.R.]


88   Reichenbach, op. cit., pp. 434f.


89   E. Mach, op. cit., p. 232.


90      Dr.  Benedict  and  Immanuel  Friedländer, Absolute  oder  relative

Bewegung, published by Leonhard Simion; Berlin 1896. These experiments

were  performed  in  1894  by  Immanuel  Friedländer  by  means  of  a  torsion

balance. He states that he obtained the effect as expected, but was not sure

whether it might not have been due to other causes. Incidentally, Friedländer

is much clearer than Mach regarding the need for an empirical decision of the

problem of the relativity of motion. He also recognizes “that the correct form

of the law of inertia is found only if relative inertia, as a mutual effect of

masses, and gravitation, which is also a mutual effect of masses, are reduced

to one unified law” (page 17).


91   Even these three points cannot be given arbitrarily; they must satisfy

three  restricting  conditions  on  their  nine  coordinates,  which  prescribe  the

mutual  distances  between  the  points.  If  we  think  of  these  nine  space

coordinates as functions of time, only six of these functions can be given

arbitrarily.  The  assertion  that  a  rigid  body  has  six  degrees  of  freedom  is

equivalent to this statement.


92   For a more detailed discussion of this example see A., pp. 49 and 128.

Another example of a system of radially expanding points is given on p. 60 in

A., in which the light-geometry is Euclidean. In regard to the replaceability of

rigid rods by the definition of rigidity of the light-geometry, see § 27 of the

present book.


93   This term was introduced by L. Lange, “Über die wissenschaftliche

Fassung  des  Galileischen  Beharrungsgesetzes”, Wundts  Philos.  Studien,

1885, Vol. II.


94   Strictly speaking this should read: “in which these axioms are satisfied to

a higher degree of approximation”. Cf. A., § 34.95   See also the discussion between Wulf-Reichenbach-Anderson in Astron.

Nachr. Vol. 213, Nos. 5083—84, 5107, 1921; Vol. 214, No. 5114; Vol. 215,

No. 5154, 1922.


96   See § 45 of this book and A., § 46.


97   Note again the rule mentioned on p. 172 that every index occurring twice

is to be summed.


98   In the two-dimensional case, the tensor R can be replaced by a single
                                                    μντ

number R, the so-called Gaussian measure of curvature.




99   Setting γ = x, φ = x and θ = x, the g become: 
10 0
G =0 22 0
0 0 x2cosixs
                  123µν

    It  can  easily  be  seen  that  the  partial  derivatives do  not  vanish

O8uv
%,

 
    throughout.


100   Changes in the metrical field due to changes in the distribution of

matter propagate only with the speed of light, not instantaneously.


101   [The numbers refer to the statement of the axioms in A.—M.R.]


102   This correction is connected with the so-called circle paradox. See A., §

44.


103   We would have to add certain conditions in terms of a determinant

which assert the indefinite character of the fundamental quadratic form. See

A., § 48.


104   See also H. Reichenbach, “Die Bewegungslehre bei Newton, Leibniz

und Huyghens,” Kantstudien 29, 1924, p. 421f.


105   Physikal. Zeitschr. 22, 1921, p. 683; and in more detail in A. Similar

ideas were developed by K. Lewin, Ztschr. f. Phys. 13, 62, 1923 and by R.

Carnap, Kantstudien 30, 1925, p. 331.106   K. Lewin, Der Begriff der Genese, Berlin 1922.


107      A.  Einstein  : Sidelights  on  Relativity  :  I. Ether  and  Relativity.  II.

Geometry and Experience. London, 1922.


108   [See H. Reichenbach, The Direction of Time, University of California

Press, Berkeley, 1956—M.R.]


109   Science and Hypothesis, Dover Publications, Inc., New York 1952, p.

53. See also p. 68.


110   This follows because the combination point P lies in the region of the

disturbance of the parameter space only under these conditions. The above-

mentioned requirement that P is disturbed only under these conditions is here

obvious,  since  otherwise  we  cannot  speak  of  action  by  contact  in  the

parameter space.


111    Op. cit., p. 285.


112   Ann. d. Phys. 61, 1920, p. 440.


113   See also A., § 4, for this distinction.


114   [See H. Reichenbach, The Direction of Time, University of California

Press, Berkeley, 1956, Ch. V.—M.R.]